GOOD EVENING,
EVERYONE.
WELCOME TO THE DECEMBER 2ND
MEETING OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY
COUNCIL.
IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOLLOWED BY THE PLEDGE
OF ALLEGIANCE
.
>> I PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE TO THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND
THE TWO GREAT PUBLIC SERVANTS
ONE NATION UNDER GOD,
INDIVISIBLE WITH LIBERTY AND
JUSTICE.
CHARLES WHAT OUR CLERK PLEASE
CALL THE ROLE OF COUNSEL
COUNSELOR HERE HOW HARRISON
HERE COUNSELOR WATSON HERE
COMES FROM OUT HERE BECAUSE
WE'RE A DENHA HERE ELSEWHERE
HERE.
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE FOR IGHER
HERE ELSEWHERE HERE ELSEWHERE
BRIGG'S CUSTOMER CORNELL HERE
WE HAVE A QUORUM.
THEY HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA, MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER FOR DENHA SECOND
BY COUNCIL MEMBER GOZI HAD BEEN
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR.
I MOVE TO ADD THE PROPOSED
RESOLUTION TO APPROVE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE COUNCIL COMMITTEE
APPOINTMENTS TO DC THREE.
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND BY
COUNCILMAN FOR WATSON
DISCUSSION OR FAVOR OPPOSED THE
AMENDMENT IS APPROVED FOR THE
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA AS
AMENDED ON FAVOR POSED THE
AGENDA IS APPROVED.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR?
>> NO MAYOR IN THAT LIGHT WE DO
HAVE TODAY A PRESENTATION AND
INTRODUCTION.
WE HAVE THE PLEASURE OF A
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
OF OUR INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
CHAIR CARTER, YOU HAVE THE TOM
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR COUNCIL
MEMBERS, MADAM CLERK, THERE'S A
LOT GOING ON IN THE OVERSIGHT
COMMUNITY AND IN KEEPING WITH
OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO EDUCATE
AND TRAIN OURSELVES.
TWO OF THE COMMISSIONERS DID
ATTEND THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF CIVILIAN OVERSIGHT AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCE IN
OCTOBER .
AND THE FIRST THING I WANT TO
SAY ABOUT THIS IS A NATIONAL
CONFERENCE AND I JUST HAVE TO
REPORT THAT AT THE OPENING
SESSION IN FRONT OF HUNDREDS
OF PEOPLE THE CITY AND COUNCIL
PERSON HARRISON WERE RECOGNIZED
FOR THE PASSAGE OF THE DRIVING
EQUALITY ORDINANCE THAT WAS
QUITE A QUITE A RECOGNITION AND
WE WERE HAPPY TO BE THERE TO
HEAR THAT WE HEARD A LOT ABOUT
OVERSIGHT ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AND AS YOU PROBABLY KNOW, THERE
ARE DIFFERENT FORMS
OF COMMISSIONS THAT ARE SET UP.
BUT WE OF COURSE OUR REVIEW
COMMISSION AND WE UNDERSTAND
THAT WE ALSO LEARNED THIS
WASN'T THAT THIS WASN'T THAT
THE NACOLE CONFLICT CONFERENCE
BUT WE LEARNED THAT IN THE
STATE OF FLORIDA THE GOVERNOR
HAS SIGNED A BILL WHICH
EFFECTIVELY DOES AWAY WITH
COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT AND THE
COMMISSIONS THERE NOW HAVE TO
HAVE TO BE APPOINTED BY THE
SHERIFF OR THE CHIEF OF POLICE
AND THERE MUST BE AT LEAST ONE
RETIRED POLICE OFFICER ON THE
COMMISSION.
>> SO WHEN WE WHEN WE HEAR
THINGS LIKE THIS AND SEE WHAT'S
GOING ON ACROSS THE COUNTRY, WE
ARE APPRECIATIVE OF THE
INDEPENDENT THAT COUNCIL HAS
GIVEN US IN OUR ORDINANCE HERE
IN MICHIGAN.
>> YOU MAY BE AWARE THAT THE
PACKAGE OF BILLS HAS BEEN
INTRODUCED AND IS NOW IN
COMMITTEE IN THE STATE
LEGISLATURE DEALING WITH
POLICING.
PART OF IT IS TO UPDATE
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS UNDER
THE MICHIGAN COMMISSION ON LAW
ENFORCEMENT STANDARDS.
THERE IS A PROPOSED BILL FOR A
DUTY TO INTERVENE POLICY WHICH
WOULD REQUIRE OFFICERS TO
INTERVENE IF A PEER IS USING
EXCESSIVE FORCE.
THERE'S ANOTHER BILL THAT
PROTECTS THE ANONYMITY
OF PEOPLE WHO FILE COMPLAINTS
AGAINST THE POLICE.
SO WE'LL BE WATCHING THESE AND
THAT ONE WAS VERY INTERESTING
TO US BECAUSE WE ARE IN THE
PROCESS OF WORKING WITH CHIEF
ANDERSON ON SOME
OF THE
POLICIES AND ONE OF THEM HAS TO
DO WITH REDACTION POLICY.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT FOR US TO DO
OUR OVERSIGHT, LOOK AT
COMPLAINTS AND WE NEED TO KNOW
WHAT'S GOING ON SO THE
INFORMATION HAS TO BE AVAILABLE
WHEN I'M SHOWING YOU THIS IS
UNDER THE OLD POLICY NO LONGER
IN EFFECT.
BUT THIS IS THE KIND OF REPORT
THAT WE WOULD GET SO WE DON'T
KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON IN THIS
CASE MEAN IT'S HARD TO DO
OVERSIGHT WHEN YOU DON'T KNOW
WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> SO WE ARE WORKING WITH THE
CHIEF ON A NEW REDACTION POLICY
ALSO WE'RE WORKING WITH THE
CHIEF ON A POLICY THAT WAS
ACTUALLY PASSED BY GREG PARK
BACK IN TWENTY TWENTY AND WAS
PASSED ON TO THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND NEVER APPARENTLY
IMPLEMENTED SO AT OUR LAST
MEETING LAST WEEK WE AGAIN
APPROVED THE POLICY.
THIS IS THE SERIOUS INCIDENT
RESPONSE CONTINGENCY PLAN.
WE'VE PASSED IT ON TO CHIEF
ANDERSON.
IT DEFINES WHAT A SERIOUS
INCIDENT IS INCLUDES LOSS
OF LIFE OR SHOOTING AND SO
FORTH.
AND WHEN SUCH A SERIOUS
INCIDENT OCCURS, THE POLICY
WOULD HAVE A REPORT COME TO
PARK SO THAT THE COMMUNITY AND
THEN TO THE COMMUNITY SO THE
COMMUNITY IS AWARE OF WHAT'S
GOING ON.
SO THAT IS PENDING I THINK
FINALLY WE ARE HAPPY THAT WE
BELIEVE THAT PROBABLY IN OUR
JANUARY MEETING WE'LL HAVE
FINALLY A FULL CONTINGENT
OF COMMISSIONERS.
WE BELIEVE THAT WILL BE TWO
PROSPECTS COMING BEFORE YOU
SOON SO THAT AT OUR MEETING AT
THE END OF JANUARY WE WILL HAVE
A FULL CONTINGENT
OF COMMISSIONERS.
>> THAT IS MY REPORT FOR TODAY.
IF THERE ARE NO QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS.
THANK YOU.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMON
RESERVE COMMON PUBLIC AND
RESERVE TIME AS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
ONE TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BY CONTACTING OUR CITY
CLERK SPEAKERS ALL INSTANC
WILL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR
CLERK OR THE TIME CLOCK WILL
NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS
OUR REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME IS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR
TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS KEN
GARBER
.
THANK YOU MR. CHAIRMAN.
I APPRECIATE THE OPPORTUNITY.
KEN GARBER SECOND WARD.
I DON'T LIVE NEAR THE AIRPORT
BUT I BELONG TO STAY GROUNDED
DOUG AND FIGHT FOR USA TAUXE
SEEK TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC ON
THE EMISSIONS IMPACT
OF COMMERCIAL AVIATION.
I HAVEN'T FLOWN PERSONALLY
SINCE TWENTY SIXTEEN FOR
CLIMATE REASONS SO I'M HERE
ABOUT THE RUNWAY EXTENSION.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT IS
WRONG TO DISMISS CLIMATE AS A
FACTOR.
IT PUTS TWENTY NINETEEN AIRPORT
CO2 EMISSIONS.
IT'S JUST NINE HUNDRED AND
SIXTY FOUR IN THAT METRIC TONS
THAT'S BECAUSE THE FAA ONLY
COUNTS EMISSIONS ON SITE.
THAT'S LIKE CALLING A HUMMER
CLIMATE FRIENDLY BASED ON
DRIVEWAY EMISSIONS ONLY.
HERE'S THE REAL IMPACT IN
TWENTY NINETEEN THERE WERE ONE
THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED SEVENTY
SIX TRIPS HERE BY JET AND TURBO
JET ASSUMING AN AVERAGE TRIP
OF TWO HUNDRED FIFTY MILES AT
FOUR POINT NINE KG CO2
EMISSIONS PER MILE THAT'S
EIGHTEEN THOUSAND METRIC TON
CO2 ALMOST TWENTY TIMES THE FAA
ESTIMATE AND THAT'S JUST CO2
ADDING IN NITROGEN OXIDE TO
WATER VAPOR IN CONTRAST WITH
THEIR GREENHOUSE EFFECTS YOU
DOUBLE THAT IMPACT NOW CONSIDER
JET FUEL UPSTREAM EMISSIONS
FROM OIL PRODUCTION EXTRACTION
TRANSPORTATION AND REFINING AND
I ESTIMATE MAYBE FIFTY THOUSAND
METRIC TONS CO2 EQUIVALENT
EMISSIONS ANNUALLY FROM JET AND
TRIPLE JET TRAFFIC TO AND FROM
OUR AIRPORT IF WE COUNT IT THIS
WAY WHICH WE DON'T AS A CITY
BUT SHOULD THAT WOULD RAISE THE
CITY'S TOTAL TRANSPORTATION
EMISSIONS BY FOURTEEN PERCENT.
NOW THERE'S THE ARGUMENT THAT
BY ENABLING JETS TO GO FROM
POINT A TO POINT B WITHOUT
REFUELING ONE POSITIVE EFFECT
OF RUNWAY EXTENSION THAT COULD
ACTUALLY LOWER EMISSIONS ANY
SUCH EFFECT WOULD BE SMALL
COMPARED TO DIRECT EMISSIONS.
IN SHORT, THE FINDING OF NO
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT WHEN IT
COMES TO CLIMATE IN THE IS
WRONG BECAUSE A FLAWED
METHODOLOGY FLYING PRIVATE IS
THE SINGLE FASTEST WAY FOR AN
INDIVIDUAL TO COOK THE PLANET
TEN TIMES FASTER THAN FLYING
COMMERCIAL AND FIFTY TIMES
FASTER THAN TRAIN TRAVEL PER
PASSENGER MILE AND GLOBAL
PRIVATE JET TRAVEL IS EXPLODING
THE JOURNAL COMMUNICATIONS,
EARTH AND ENVIRONMENT JUST
REPORTED THAT CO2 EMISSIONS
FROM PRIVATE AVIATION JUMPED
FORTY SIX PERCENT BETWEEN
TWENTY NINETEEN AND TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THANKS TO FLYING
SOME WEALTHY INDIVIDUALS
PRODUCE ALMOST FIVE HUNDRED
TIMES MORE CO2 IN A YEAR THAN
THE AVERAGE PERSON IN MY AND WE
SHOULD BAN PRIVATE JETS AT THE
AIRPORT IN SOME EUROPEAN CITIES
WE'VE DONE THAT'S EXEMPT HEALTH
EMERGENCIES LIKE U OF M
SURVIVAL AND DONOR ORGAN
TRANSPORT.
BUT LET'S MAKE A STATEMENT AS A
CITY THAT WE DON'T WELCOME THE
CORPORATE ELITE IN THE SUPER
WEALTHY INDIVIDUALS WHOSE
LUXURY FLIGHTS ARE HELPING TO
DESTROY THE PLANET REMEMBER 80
PERCENT OF THE WORLD'S
POPULATION HAS NEVER SET FOOT
AND AN AIRPLANE MOSTER IN THE
GLOBAL SOUTH AND THEY'RE THE
ONES SUFFERING MOST FLYING
PRIVATE IS EMBLEMATIC OF OUR
MANY EXCESSES AS A SOCIETY.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CARL BARTON
.
HELLO THE CITY OF BANABA.
IF YOU HAVE IF A CITIZEN OF THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR HAS A PROBLEM
WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT, WE
ARE TOLD TO CONTACT THE AIRPORT
COMMITTEE.
THE QUESTION I HAVE IS AFTER
CONTACTING THE COMMITTEE AND
THEY DON'T BRING UP THE ISSUE
IN ANY OF THE MEETINGS, THEY
DON'T PRESENT A RESOLUTION AND
THE PROBLEM KEEPS ON CONTINUING
.
WHAT SHOULD A CITIZEN DO TO
ADDRESS THAT ONGOING ISSUE WITH
THE OF POLICE?
IF YOU GO ON GOOGLE MAPS RIGHT
NOW AND LOOK UP LARCOMBE CITY
HALL IN ANN ARBOR AND STREET
YOU CAN SEE IN ANN ARBOR POLICE
CRUISER PARKED IN A TOW AWAY
ZONE IF YOU GO ON YOUTUBE AND
SEARCH ANN OF OUR POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND SEAN STEWART WHO
IS THE PRESIDENT OF THE ANN
ARBOR POLICE UNION CLICK ON
DETROIT LOCAL FOR NEWS SEGMENT
THE INTRODUCTION STARTS WITH
THEM ZOOMING IN ON AN ANN ARBOR
POLICE CRUISER PARKED IN A TOW
AWAY ZONE.
IF YOU GO TO STREET VIEW ON
GOOGLE EARTH YOU CAN COUNT OVER
A DOZEN ANN ARBOR POLICE
VEHICLES PARKED UNPAID PARKING
SPOTS ANY DAY OF THE WEEK.
YOU CAN GO ON AND STREET AND
LOOK AT THAT DURING THE PAID
PARKING TIME AND YOU CAN EASILY
SEE OVER HALF A DOZEN POLICE
VEHICLES PAID IN PARKING SPOTS
IF YOU CONTACT POLICE OFFICERS
AND ASK THEM ABOUT THIS, EVERY
SINGLE ONE I'VE TALKED TO
INSTANTLY SAYS THEY'RE EXEMPT
FROM TRAFFIC LAWS.
MICHIGAN CODIFIED LAW TWO FIVE
SEVEN SIX ZERO THREE IS VERY
CLEAR.
POLICE OFFICERS ARE ONLY EXEMPT
FROM TRAFFIC LAWS ON THE WAY TO
AN EMERGENCY CALL AND THEY HAVE
TO HAVE THEIR LIGHTS OR SIRENS
ON UNLESS STEALTH IS REQUIRED.
THE LAW ALSO CLEARLY STATES
THAT POLICE OFFICERS ARE NOT
EXEMPT ON THE WAY BACK PARKING
OR ANYTHING OTHER THAN A CALL.
WHEN YOU TALK TO ANY POLICE
OFFICER THEY DON'T INSTANTLY
SAY THEY ARE EXEMPT FROM ALL
TRAFFIC LAWS.
NOW THAT MEANS THAT EITHER THE
ENTIRE ANN ARBOR POLICE TO
ASSIST POLICE DEPARTMENT IS ILL
TRAINED ON WHAT THEY ARE EXEMPT
OF OR THEY'RE INTENTIONALLY
LYING TO CITIZENS.
NOW I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
INCOMPETENCY OR INTENTIONAL BUT
THAT'S NOT BENEFICIAL TO OUR
SOCIETY.
SO THE SOLUTION IS EASY AS A
CITY WE GET THE ANTI-TERROR
POLICE TO STOP ILLEGALLY
PARKING ON AND STREET THE
PROBLEM IS HOW DO WE GET THE
NUMBER OF POLICE TO STOP
ILLEGAL PARKING ON AND STREET
BECAUSE AS VIDEOS GO MORE
THERE'S JUST GETTING MORE AND
MORE EVIDENCE OF AN OUR POLICE
ILLEGALLY PARKING IN FRONT
OF CITY HALL NOW I HOPE THAT
I'M GOING TO GO BUT I HOPE THAT
SOMEONE FROM THIS COMMITTEE IS
ACTUALLY GOING TO RESPOND OR
WILLING TO ACTUALLY VOLUNTEER
AND MEET WITH ME OR BE WITH A
CITIZEN TO DISCUSS THIS ISSUE.
I WATCH THE REST OF THIS VIDEO
ONLINE AND HOPEFULLY ONE OF YOU
WILL ACTUALLY STEP UP AND HELP
RESOLVE THIS ISSUE.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
HAVE A GOOD DAY.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS DAN
.
HELLO AND THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK.
MY NAME IS DAN BILLIKEN ALONG
WITH MY WIFE KAREN WHITE.
I LIVE AT TWENTY SEVEN NINETEEN
CRANBROOK AND SE ANN ARBOR
DIRECTLY BENEATH THE FLIGHT
PATH FOR AIRCRAFT APPROACHING
ANN ARBOR MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
I'VE BEEN DISTRACTED BY
NATIONAL POLITICS THIS PAST
YEAR AND JUST RECENTLY FOUND
OUT THAT ANN ARBOR AIRPORT
CHANGES ARE BEING CONSIDERED 11
DAYS AGO I DID EMAIL MY COUNCIL
PEOPLE WERE VERY CONCERNING
RUMORS I'D HEARD ABOUT THIS BUT
I'M STILL AWAITING A RESPONSE
SO I'M NOT ALL THAT WELL
INFORMED ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON
HERE.
HOWEVER, IT DOES CONCERN ME.
I HAVE A VERY NICE BACKYARD AT
MY HOUSE ON CRANBROOK ROAD NEAR
AND PACARD BEARPARK COUNTY FARM
PARK SOUTHEAST SIDE OF ANN
ARBOR WERE THREE GREAT
NEIGHBORHOOD LOTS OF TREES,
SIDEWALKS, GOOD PEOPLE.
MY FAMILY LIKES TO BE OUTSIDE A
LOT ESPECIALLY FROM APRIL TO
NOVEMBER.
AND LET ME TELL YOU THE
INCOMING PLANES THAT GO OVER MY
HOUSE ARE UNFORTUNATELY VERY
OFTEN LOUD, DISTRACTING AND
ANNOYING AND SOME DAYS THERE'S
LOTS OF THEM.
I HAVE REASON TO BE VERY
SUSPICIOUS THAT ANY SO-CALLED
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS AT THE
AIRPORT WILL LIKELY BE USED AS
AN EXCUSE OR PRETEXT TO BRING
BIGGER, LOUDER AND MORE
NUMEROUS AIRCRAFT TO THE
AIRPORT.
THIS WOULD HAVE AN IMMEDIATE
AND DIRECT NEGATIVE IMPACT UPON
MY FAMILY'S QUALITY OF LIFE AND
INCIDENTALLY WOULD ALSO IMPACT
THE PROPERTY VALUES OF EVERY
HOUSE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
I'M GOING TO HAVE TO RAISE MY
VOICE NOW A LITTLE TO MAKE A
POINT.
I'LL TRY TO BE NICE ABOUT IT.
THIS IS BEAUTIFUL THAT WE HAVE
THE SKIES RIGHT HERE.
THESE AIRCRAFT CAN BE LOUD WHEN
THESE BUZZING PLANES AND WINEY
BUSINESS JETS FLY OVER.
WE HAVE TO EITHER RAISE OUR
VOICES A LOT OR SIMPLY SHUT UP
FOR THE 30 TO 60 SECONDS IT
TAKES FOR THESE CARBON SPEWING
CHARIOTS OF THE PRIVILEGED
TO
HAVE THEIR WAY WITH THE SKIES
ABOVE MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> OH NO.
THERE COMES ANOTHER ONE REALLY.
THAT'S HOW IT IS.
IT'S LOUD.
IT REALLY IS.
>> BY THE WAY, WE'RE ALSO
AGAINST CARBON SPEWING HERE IN
ANN ARBOR ARE WE KEN GARBER
SPOKE TO THAT.
>> SO AS I MENTIONED, I KNOW
I'M NOT AS WELL INFORMED HERE
AS I WOULD LIKE TO BE, BUT THIS
AIRPORT PROPOSAL SURE LOOKS
LIKE ANOTHER GIVEAWAY TO THE
AIRBORNE CONVENIENCE OF WEALTHY
FOLKS WHO IN MOST CASES DON'T
EVEN LIVE IN ANN.
I'M NOT SURE ABOUT THAT BUT I
BET AT THE EXPENSE IN BOTH
QUALITY OF LIFE AND REAL ESTATE
TREASURE OF NOT SO WEALTHY
FOLKS WHO DO LIVE IN AND PAY
TAXES IN ANN ARBOR PLEASE,
PLEASE, PLEASE DON'T DO
ANYTHING TO FACILITATE MORE FOR
BIGGER OR DIFFERENT CLASSES
OF AIRCRAFT BUZZING AND WHINING
OVER MY SUMMER BACKYARD.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BARBARA
PERKINS.
GOOD EVENING MAYOR TAYLOR AND
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
I'M HERE TONIGHT TO ASK YOU TO
END THE LONG AGONY ISING
AIRPORT EXPANSION CONTROVERSY
BY SOUND REJECTING THE PROPOSAL
BEFORE YOU TO ACCEPT FUNDS FROM
THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION AERONAUTICS
DIVISION FOR PLANNING AND
DESIGN OF AN EXTENSION TO
RUNWAY SIX TWENTY FOUR AT THE
ANN ARBOR MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
WHEN A PRIOR RESULT OPTION WAS
REJECTED BY A BIPARTISAN
COUNCIL A HALF CENTURY AGO THE
LATE REPUBLICAN COUNCIL MEMBER
JAMES AMERIC ADDED A POSTSCRIPT
TO REQUIRE THAT AIRPORT
EXPANSION NOT BE BROUGHT BACK
TO COUNCIL UNLESS SIGNIFICANT
CHANGE HAD TAKEN PLACE NEAR THE
INTERSECTION OF ST. ELSWORTH
ROADS.
>> SIGNIFICANT CHANGE HAS TAKEN
PLACE AND THAT CHANGE MAKES
EVEN MORE APPARENT THE
IMPERATIVE OF REJECT ANY ADDED
CAPACITY TO A FACIL CITY WHERE
THE VOLUME OF AVIATION
OPERATIONS HAS DECLINED
DRAMATICALLY.
NOW BUSINESS AND RESIDENTIAL
SITES SURROUNDING THE AIRPORT
INCREASE IN VOLUME AND VALUE
WITH EVERY PASSING YEAR.
I HAVE LIVED IN THE SAME FOURTH
WARD HOUSE FOR NEARLY 60 YEARS.
DURING THAT TIME I WAS
APPOINTED BY THREE DIFFERENT
MAYORS TWO DEMOCRATS AND ONE
REPUBLICAN AND TO THREE
SEPARATE TERMS AS A NON-PAY
CITIZEN ADVOCATE ON THE AIRPORT
ADVISORY COMMITTEE EXPANSION
OF CAPACITY AT THE AIRPORT WAS
CONSISTENTLY ADVOCATED BY
AIRPORT MANAGERS AND OTHER
COMMUNITY COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
THROUGHOUT MY THREE TERMS
OF SERVICE TODAY MORE HOUSING
IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION AT
BRIARWOOD AND PROJECTED MORE
AROUND THE SEVEN SEVEN SEVEN
BUILDING CASCOS ZINGERMAN'S
NEITZ BANKS, HOTELS AND OTHER
BUSINESSES ATTRACT MANY
CUSTOMERS TO THE AREA AROUND
THE AIRPORT POLLUTION OF THE
HURON RIVER AND UNDERGROUND
WATER BY UP RIVER INDUSTRIAL
PLANTS AND THE GALMAN PLUME
MAKE PRODUCT PROTECTION OF THE
AQUIFER UNDERNEATH OUR CITY
EVEN MORE CRUCIAL.
THE LAND AT STATE AND ELSWORTH
THEN CALLED THE STEAR WATER
FARM WAS BOUGHT IN 1913 FOR ITS
ACCESS TO THE AQUIFER.
THESE THANK YOU THESE WATERS
MUST BE PROTECTED.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PAUL
KHILNANI
.
THANK YOU MR. MAYOR.
CITY COUNCIL.
I WOULD LIKE TO TAKE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO VOICE MY
OPPOSITION TO THE PLAN TO
EXTEND VERSION OF THE ANN ARBOR
RUNWAY TWENTY FOUR SIX I'M A
RESIDENT OF STONEBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN'S SCHOOL
OF MEDICINE PROFESSOR EMERITUS
OF ORDERING ALLERGY SPECIALIST
IN AUDIOLOGY AND WAY BACK THE
FORMER AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER.
AS SUCH I HAVE EXPERTIZE IN
HEARING LOSS THE DETRIMENTAL
EFFECTS OF NOISE ON HEARING AND
OTHER HEALTH ISSUES AND ALSO
HAPPENED TO HAVE STILL HAVE
SOME UNDERSTANDING OF AVIATION
AND FLIGHT PATTERNS FOR PEOPLE
RESIDING IN THE AIRPORTS.
THE CONSTANT NOISE CAN BE
DISTRESSING INTERRUPTING SLEEP
AND LEADING TO GENERAL NOISE
ANNOYANCE IN ADDITION TO
CAUSING HEARING LOSS INDEED
NOISE POLLUTION IS A SERIOUS,
IS SERIOUS AND RANKS SECOND AS
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH HAZARD
AFTER AIR POLLUTION.
ACCORDING TO THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, THE EXTENSION
OF THE RUNWAY EAST TOWARD
STANBRIDGE ALLOWING THE
ADDITION OF LARGER JET AIRCRAFT
WILL RESULT IN LOW FLYING TWIN
ENGINE JETS OVER STONEBRIDGE ON
FINAL APPROACH PROBABLY ONE
HUNDRED FEET OR LESS.
IN ADDITION TO OTHER HAZARDS,
THIS COULD RESULT IN
SIGNIFICANT DAMAGING NOISE
EXPOSURE TO RESIDENTS
OF STONEBRIDGE WITH ADVERSE
EFFECTS ON HEARING
CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS SLEEP
DISTURBANCE, STRESS TO NAME A
FEW.
THE AIRCRAFT IS A COMPLEX
ACOUSTIC SOURCE COMPRISING BOTH
ENGINE AND AIRFRAME COMPONENTS.
IT IS THE LANDING AIRCRAFT.
IT GENERATES THE LARGEST NOISE
FOOTPRINT WITH A LARGE AD
COMPARED TO CURRENTLY THE LIGHT
SINGLE ENGINE PISTON AIRCRAFT
WITH ITS UNDERCARRIAGE DOWN AND
FLAPS EXTEND ITS FLYING LOW
OVER STONEBRIDGE NOISE LEVELS
GENERATED BY ENGINES AND THE
AIRFRAME COULD ROUTINELY EXCEED
100 DECIBELS AND COULD BE
OCCASIONALLY AS HIGH AS 130
DECIBELS.
SIGNIFICANTLY HARMFUL TO
HEARING THIS WOULD BE AN
UNACCEPTABLE RISKY SITUATION
THAT COULD RESULT IN
PREVENTABLE INJURIES TO
RESIDENTS AND EVEN POSSIBLE
LITIGATION.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY IGNORED
THE INDIVIDUAL NOISE EVENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH A JET COMING IN
FOR A STRAIGHT IN APPROACH
LANDING ON THE EXTENT OF RUNWAY
AND FOCUS ON CUMULUS ANNUAL
AVERAGE PROJECTIONS AND NOISE
CONTOURS.
WHILE CUMULATIVE NOISE EXPOSURE
IS A RELEVANT OVERALL MEASURE,
IT IS AN INCOMPLETE PICTURE
OF EFFECTS OF NOISE EXPOSURE.
EVEN A FEW INDIVIDUAL
OCCURRENCES ON A DAILY BASIS
COULD THE EXACT HARM TO
RESIDENTS OF TONBRIDGE.
THEREFORE I RESPECTFULLY
REQUEST TO CONSIDER THE
CANCELATION OF THIS PROJECT.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR
ATTENTION.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ALEX LOWE
.
ALEX IS JOINING US ON ZOOME.
GO AHEAD NAME THIS IS ALEX
CALLING IN FROM NZEI SANABEL.
>> I WANT TO TALK TO YOU GUYS
ABOUT THE AIRPORT AS WELL BUT I
SEEM TO BE THE ONLY ONE WHO'S
THINKING ABOUT ANOTHER
PARTICULAR TYPE OF POLLUTION AT
THAT AIRPORTS PROVIDE THAT IS
AIR BASED LED POLLUTION.
>> YOU SEE AIRPORTS OR WHAT
ESPECIALLY SMALL MUNICIPAL
AIRPORTS ONE OF THE FEW PLACES
WHERE YOU CAN BUY LEADED
GASOLINE AND AS A SMALL TURBO
PROPS TO TAKE OFF AND LAND AT
THE AND MUNICIPAL AIRPORT THEY
RELEASE ALL SORTS OF NEXIUM AT
RIGHT OVER THE BRYANT AND
MITCHELL NEIGHBORHOODS
OF ANOTHER WHICH SOME OF THE
LOWEST INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS IN
OUR CITY.
NOW I DON'T ACTUALLY THINK THAT
EXPANDING THE AIRPORT IS REALLY
GOING TO DO MUCH TO MAKE OUR
NEIGHBOR MORE AVAILABLE TO
PEOPLE AFTER JUST 12 MILES AWAY
FROM THAT AIRPORT IS WILLOW RUN
WHICH HAS MORE MORE CAPACITY
FOR OFFENSE A LONGER RUN AWAY
AT NEARLY THE SAME ANGLE RATHER
THAN BEING SIX TWENTY FOUR IT
IS FIVE TWENTY THREE AND
OF COURSE WILLOW RUN IS ALREADY
FAR BUSIER THAN THE ANN ARBOR
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
IN FACT ALL THINGS CONSIDERED I
DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY WE EVEN
HAVE A MUNICIPAL AIRPORT REALLY
RUN THAT SERVES ALL OF THE
NEEDS OF THE ANN ARBOR
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
HOWEVER, IF WE'RE GOING TO KEEP
IT TO KEEP IT AROUND WHICH
EXPANDING IT WOULD ALMOST
CERTAINLY MEAN
THAT WE'RE
INVESTED IN HAVING THIS WASTE
OF RESOURCES FOR ANOTHER 50 OR
SO YEARS.
>> THEN AT LEAST LET'S ADD
SOMETHING TO THIS WORLD TO SAY
STOP SELLING LEADED GASOLINE AT
ALL IS HOME TO ONE OF THE
COMPANIES THAT THAT SELLS AND
MAKES MAKES AND SELLS UNLEADED
AVIATION GASOLINE.
YET IT IS NOT AVAILABLE AT OUR
THIRTY SECONDS.
THAT'S THAT'S QUITE RIDICULOUS
.
LET'S STOP POLLUTING WARDS
THREE AND FOUR WITH LETTING THE
AIR AND START SELLING LEADED
GAS OR JUST SHUT DOWN THAT
AIRPORT.
>> IT IS FULL OF DEAD AND
REDUNDANT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS GREG FERRIS
.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR COUNCIL MY
NAME IS GREG FERRIS.
I AM THE CURRENT CHAIR OF THE
AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND
I'M HERE TONIGHT TO TO HOPE THE
COUNCIL LOOKS AT TWO
RESOLUTIONS THAT ARE ABOUT THE
AIRPORT RUNWAY SAFETY EXTENSION
PROJECT IN PLACE.
THE AIRPORT HAS BEEN SERVING
THE COMMUNITY FOR OVER NINE SIX
YEARS.
IT'S BEEN IN PLACE IT'S BROUGHT
MAIL DELIVERY, PASSENGER
TRANSPORT.
IT'S BEEN A PART OF LARGE PART
OF FLIGHT TRAINING.
IT DOES BENEFICIAL FLIGHTS LIKE
SURVIVAL FLIGHT HEADQUARTERED
OUT OF THE AIRPORT AND BRINGS
RECREATIONAL AND OTHER COMMERCE
IN PLACE.
THE RUNWAY EXTENSION PROJECT IS
WORKING ON SIX TO FOUR HAS BEEN
MENTIONED BEFORE.
IT'S A RUNWAY THAT WAS PAID IN
THE LATE 1950S SO IT'S BEEN
AROUND QUITE A WHILE.
>> THE PROJECT IS LOOKING TO
VITAL THINGS IN SAFETY MATTERS
OF MITIGATION.
ONE IS THE END OF TWO FOR THE
ONE AT STATE STREET IS GOING TO
BE SHIFTED ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY FEET.
THIS IS NEEDED BECAUSE THE LINE
OF SIGHT BETWEEN THE TOWER AND
THOSE CRITICAL POINTS
OF TAXIWAY TO A RUNWAY IS NOT
VISIBLE.
THEREFORE THE FAA WOULD
CONSIDER IT A POSSIBILITY OF A
HIGH RISK OF A RUNWAY INCURSION
WHICH PROBABLY HEARD QUITE A
BIT ABOUT THE FAA OVER THE LAST
THREE OR FOUR YEARS ABOUT
AIRCRAFT LANDING AND TAKING OFF
IN THE INCURSION THAT CAN
HAPPEN.
THE MOVING ONE HUNDRED FIFTY
FEET WILL ALLOW LINE OF SIGHT
SO THE AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
CAN SEE THE ENTIRE TAXIWAY AND
THE INTERSECTION.
THAT MOVE WILL ALSO ALLOW US TO
CHANGE THE GEOMETRY OF THE TWO
TAXIWAYS AS THEY MEET THE
RUNWAY TO MEET CURRENT
STANDARDS THE NEXT PART OF IT
IS THE EXTENSION OF SEVEN OR
TWENTY FEET TO THE APPROACH
SIDE OF SIX WHICH IS TOWARDS
THE SOUTHWEST.
THIS HAPPENS IS ESSENTIAL FOR
US TO MEET OUR B2K CATEGORY
STANDARDS WHICH OPERATED ABOUT
A FORTY TWO FORTY THREE HUNDRED
FOOT RUNWAY FOR A CATEGORY TO
BEAT.
WE'RE AT THE MINIMUM CURRENTLY
NOW THE MINIMUM STANDARD FOR
THAT CATEGORY OF AIRPORT AND
OVERALL OUT OF THE TWENTY TWO
OR SO CATEGORY B TO AIRPORTS IN
MICHIGAN WE'RE IN THE LOWER
QUARTER LENGTH EVEN THOUGH THAT
OUR NUMBER OF OPERATIONS IS
QUITE HIGHER THAN MOST OF THE
OTHER ONES.
>> SO THOSE TWO SAFETY
MITIGATIONS ARE PROACTIVE
STEPS.
THE AIRPORTS ARE DOING WANTS TO
DO TO ENSURE THAT THE WE CAN
MEET THE THE CURRENT SAFETY
STANDARDS AS DOCUMENTED FOR
CATEGORY B AND THE RUNWAY
INCURSION PROBLEMS.
THAT'S IT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ANDREW
MCGILL
.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M HERE TONIGHT TO REITERATE
IN MY LETTER TO YOU OF LAST
WEEK POINTING OUT SOME
IMPORTANT FACTS YOU SHOULD KNOW
BEFORE VOTING ON TONIGHT'S
RESOLUTIONS ON THE PROPOSED
EXPANSION OF AN R.P.M. AIRPORT
.
FIRST, THESE ITEMS APPEAR ON
TONIGHT'S AGENDA AS THE SAFETY
EXTENSION OF RUNWAY SIX TWENTY
FOUR.
BUT THE FAA SAYS THE RUNWAY IS
ALREADY SAFE AND THE WORD
SAFETY EXTENSION ARE NOWHERE IN
THE 93 PAGE ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT OR THE 17 PAGE
FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ALTHOUGH
EXPANSION ADVOCATES STILL USE
THAT PHRASE BEFORE YOU.
ALSO THE CLAIM THAT AN EXPANDED
RUNWAY IS FOR PILOT SAFETY
BECAUSE OF 12 SO-CALLED
OVERRUNS BETWEEN 1998 AND 2008
IS NOT SUPPORTED BY THE FACTS.
ACTUALLY ONLY TWO OVERRUNS WERE
SIGNIFICANT AND EVEN THOSE
PLANES ONLY RAN A FEW DOZEN
FEET OFF THE END OF THE RUNWAY
NOT JUSTIFICATION FOR A 720
FOOT RUNWAY EXTENSION.
ANOTHER ITEM CLAIMS THAT THE
CURRENT RUNWAY USERS SUFFER
UNDUE CONCESSIONS IN REDUCED
FUEL PASSENGERS AND MAKE
DIVERSIONS TO OTHER AIRPORTS.
YET DESPITE REPEATED FAA
DEMANDS, THE CITY DID NOT
PROVIDE DETAILS ON THE
CONCESSIONS FREQUENCY SEVERITY
OF IMPACT, ECONOMIC
CONSEQUENCES AND OTHER
PERTINENT DETAILS IF THE
CONCESSIONS WARRANTED A RUNWAY
EXTENSION AND NEVER HAD 12
YEARS TO PRODUCE SUPPORTING
DOCUMENTATION YET IT DID NOT
INSTEAD CONSIDER THE SAFETY
OF PEOPLE LIVING NEAR THE
AIRPORT UNIONIZED OR PITTSFIELD
ANY EXPANSION WOULD WORSEN THE
HARMFUL HEALTH EFFECTS
OF AIRCRAFT NOISE HARMFUL
GASOLINE RAIN FROM THE PAST
DRIVEN AIRCRAFT WHICH MAKE UP
NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE ARAB
FLEET FOUR AND A HALF MILLION
DOLLARS IN POSSIBLY LOST
PROPERTY TAX REVENUE TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS INCLUDING A MILLION
AND A HALF DOLLARS LOST
ANNUALLY TO THE ENTIRE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS RISK TO THE DRINKING
WATER WELLS AT THE AIRPORT AND
THE CITY'S OWN ADMISSION THAT
AN EXPANDED RUNWAY COULD
INCREASE JET TRAFFIC TENFOLD TO
A DANGEROUS 30 600 OPERATIONS A
YEAR.
THE LAST POINT TONIGHT'S
RESOLUTION STATES THAT ALL
FUNDING FOR THIS PROJECT COMES
FROM FEES PAID BY USERS
OF AVIATION INDUSTRY SERVICES.
NOT TRUE ALMOST 600 MILLION
DOLLARS OF THE FEDERAL AIRPORTS
FUND COMES DIRECTLY FROM INCOME
TAXES AND THE USER FEE
STATEMENT MISLEADINGLY IMPLIES
THAT PILOTS AND PLANE OWNERS
WILL PAY FOR ANY RUNWAY
EXTENSION.
ALSO NOT TRUE OVER 96 PERCENT
96 PERCENT COMES FROM TAXES
PAID BY YOU AND ME EVERY TIME
WE BUY AN AIRPLANE TICKET SHIP
A PACKAGE BY FEDEX UPS OR ORDER
FROM AMAZON NOT SMALL AIRPLANE
OPERATORS.
>> WE URGE YOU TO VOTE AGAINST
THESE RESOLUTIONS TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CATHY
FORESTS
, CATHY BORRIS PHONE
NUMBER SIX FOUR FOUR STAR SIX
ON YOUR PHONE.
GO AHEAD.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
MY NAME IS CATHY BOYCE.
I LIVE AT 176 CHARLTON ARE
EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN BOTH THE
GOAL OF CARBON NEUTRALITY BY
THE YEAR 2030.
IT ALSO RECOMMENDS A STRATEGY
FOR REACHING THIS GOAL.
THE STRATEGY IS TO REDUCE THE
MILES WE TRAVEL IN OUR VEHICLES
REGARDLESS VEHICLE TYPE BY 50
PERCENT WITH ITS GOAL IN MIND
IT IS IRONIC THAT THIS ONE AND
THESE TO HAVE BEEN PUT ON THE
AGENDA FOR CITY COUNCIL'S
APPROVAL TONIGHT BECAUSE THIS
ONE AND THE TWO WILL MOVE
FORWARD A CONFLICTING GOAL THE
GOAL OF RECONFIGURING AND
EXTENDING THE RUNWAYS OF ANN
ARBOR AIRPORT THIS IN TURN WILL
ENABLE USE BY LARGER JETS AND
MORE JET TRAFFIC.
HERE IS WHAT MAYOR TAYLOR SAYS
IN HIS LETTER OF WELCOME ON
PAGE FIVE OF THE EIGHT TO ZERO
PLAN AND I QUOTE EVERY PERSON,
EVERY HOMEOWNER, RENTERS,
STUDENT VISITOR, COMMUNITY
MEMBER, BUSINESS OWNER, WORKER,
YOUTH AN ELECTED LEADER HAS A
SIGNIFICANT ROLE TO PLAY IN
ACHIEVING COMMUNITY WIDE
CARBON NEUTRALITY AND QUOTE
WHEN MAYOR TAYLOR SAYS EVERY
PERSON I BELIEVE THAT EVERY
PERSON MUST INCLUDE THOSE WHO
TRAVEL TO AND FROM ANN ARBOR BY
PRIVATE OR CORPORATE JET.
IF THAT IS NOT THE CASE, IF
ONLY PERSONS OF LESSER
FINANCIAL MEANS THAN JET
TRAVELERS ARE ASKED TO MAKE
SACRIFICES THAT CERTAINLY FLY,
THEN THAT CERTAINLY FLIES IN
THE FACE OF THE ADMIRABLE GOALS
OF THE H0 PLAN.
THE WANT AND DESERVE TO CLAIM
THAT THE RUNWAY SHOULD BE
EXTENDED FOR REASONS OF SAFETY
BUT NO CLEAR DANGER FROM THE
CURRENT DESIGN THE RUNWAYS HAS
EVER BEEN DEMONSTRATED.
OTHERS SAY THEY SUSPECT THAT
THE TRUE PURPOSE OF THE
PROPOSED RUNWAY EXTENSION IS TO
ALLOW MORE AND LARGER JETS INTO
AN AIRBUS AIRPORT AT A TIME
WHEN WE ARE FULLY AWARE OF HOW
HIGHLY POLLUTING THESE JETS ARE
CONSIDERING THAT WE ARE IN A
CLIMATE EMERGENCY, I ENCOURAGE
EVERY PERSON AND CITY COUNCIL
TO VOTE NO ON THIS ONE AND THE
US TO INSTALL.
LET'S MOVE FORWARD WITH
PROJECTS OF BROADER COMMUNITY
BENEFIT INTENDED AIRPORT RUNWAY
WILL BENEFIT ONLY THE VERY
WEALTHY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS AARON ENZA
,MAYOR CITY COUNCIL.
THANK.
I'VE BEEN FLYING OUT OF THE ANN
ARBOR AIRPORT SINCE THE EARLY
90S.
IT WAS AN AIRPORT WHERE I
LEARNED HOW TO FLY IT LED TO AN
AIRLINE CAREER.
I HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO BE
ABLE TO FLY IN WORLDWIDE CARGO
SERVICE SUPPORTING OUR TROOPS,
FLYING AIR AMBULANCE MISSIONS,
SAVING PEOPLE'S LIVES
LITERALLY.
AND ALL OF THAT STARTED IN ANN
ARBOR AIRPORT BY EXPANDING THIS
RUNWAY YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE IT
A SAFER AIRPORT.
THAT'S WHY THE WORD SAFETY IS
IN THE PACKAGE TONIGHT OR ON
THE AGENDA.
A LONGER RUNWAY GIVES A PILOT A
CHOICE IF THEY'RE TAKING OFF
AND MAYBE SOMETHING DOESN'T
QUITE SEEM RIGHT TO BE ABLE TO
ABORT THAT TAKEOFF MUCH FURTHER
INTO THE TAKEOFF ROLL AND BE
ABLE TO STILL STOP SAFELY ON
THE REMAINING RUNWAY.
>> THERE WERE TWO ENGINE
FAILURES THAT WERE AT ANN ARBOR
AIRPORT, BOTH OF WHICH THE
AIRPLANES WITH A LONGER RUNWAY
COULD HAVE RETURNED TO THE
RUNWAY BUT WERE FORCED TO LAND
IN THE FIELD BEYOND THE RUNWAY
.
YOU KNOW, ONE OF WHICH
FORTUNATELY THERE IS ONLY VERY
MINOR DAMAGE THE AIRPLANE
ANOTHER ONE THE DAMAGE IS SO
SUBSTANTIAL THE AIRPLANE THE
ACTUALLY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
HAD TO CUT THE PILOT OUT OF THE
AIRPLANE AND FORTUNATELY NOT
SUBSTANTIAL INJURIES BUT
NONETHELESS HAD THE RUNWAY BEEN
LONGER, THAT SAME VERY AIRPLANE
COULD HAVE LANDED ON THE RUNWAY
AND HAD ROLLED SLOWLY OFF THE
END OF THE RUNWAY WOULD NOT
HAVE CAUSED THE DAMAGE AND
DESTRUCTION.
EARLIER THIS YEAR I OBSERVED A
SMALL SIX SEAT AIRPLANE LANDING
SHORT OF THE RUNWAY AND THEY
LANDED SHORT OF THE RUNWAY
BECAUSE THE RUNWAY IS SHORT.
SO YOU TRY TO LAND AT THE VERY
BEGINNING TO GIVE YOURSELF THE
MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF ROLLING TIME
AND STOPPING TIME AVAILABLE TO
BE ABLE TO UTILIZE THE SHORT
RUNWAY WAS ALREADY BROUGHT UP
TONIGHT.
THERE HAD BEEN TWELVE RUNWAY
EXCURSIONS FROM THE ANN ARBOR
AIRPORT.
THE REST OF THE ENTIRE STATE
DURING THAT TIME ALL AIRPORTS
TOGETHER WAS FIVE SO TWO THIRDS
OF THE RUNWAY EXCURSIONS
OF GOING OFF AT THE END OF THE
RUNWAY ARE AT THE ANN ARBOR
AIRPORT.
SO I URGE YOU TO VOTE IN FAVOR
OF THESE PROPOSALS BECAUSE YOU
LITERALLY ARE GOING TO BE
SAVING SOMEBODY'S LIFE SOMEDAY
YOU WILL MAKE IT SAFER AT THE
ANN ARBOR AIRPORT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JOHN
SULLIVAN
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS JOHN SULLIVAN.
I REGULARLY FLY OUT OF THE ANN
ARBOR AIRPORT.
THE AIRPORT IS AN ESSENTIAL
RESOURCE FOR THE COMMUNITY.
THE FLIGHT SCHOOLS, FLYING
CLUBS, AIRCRAFT RENTAL AND
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE FACILITIES
.
MANY OF MY FRIENDS AND STUDENTS
HAVE GONE ON TO FLY FOR THE
UNITED, DELTA, AMERICAN AND
OTHER AVIATION COMPANIES.
WE DO AERIAL SURVEY AND OUR
TWIN ENGINE AIRCRAFT REQUIRE
THE FULL LENGTH OF RUNWAY SIX
TO FOUR.
WE WOULD BENEFIT FROM HAVING
MORE RUNWAY TO HAVE A LARGER
SAFETY MARGIN.
WE CARRY CAMERAS WHICH MAP OUT
THE HARMFUL ALGAE BLOOM IN THE
WESTERN BASIN OF LAKE ERIE,
HELP MONITOR THE SAFETY
OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND OTHER
ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATIONS.
OUR AIRPLANES AND CAMERAS ARE
HEAVY WHICH REQUIRE MORE RUNWAY
.
WE WOULD BE MORE COMFORTABLE
WITH THE PROPOSED ENHANCEMENTS
AND RUNWAYS ARE THE SHORTEST
WE'VE EVER LANDED ON.
WE'LL GO OUT AND LAND THREE OR
FOUR RUNWAYS A DAY AND ALWAYS
COMING BACK TO ANN HARBOR IS
THE SHORTEST RUNWAY WE LAND ON
AND AN IMPORTANT FEATURE
OF SAFETY ENHANCEMENTS WILL BE
THE IMPROVED VISIBILITY FOR
CONTROL TOWER PERSONNEL TO HAVE
VISUAL CONTACT WITH THE
AIRCRAFT HOLDING SHORT
OF RUNWAY TWO FOUR AT THIS TIME
THERE'S A SIGNIFICANT BLIND
SPOT FOR THE PERSONNEL IN THE
AIR AND THE AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL
TOWER WHICH IS LOCATED RIGHT
HERE AND THE LINE OF SIGHT TO
THE OLD SHORT AREA RUNWAY TO
FORGE HERE UNLESS YOU'RE RIGHT
AT THE HOLD SHORTLY THERE ARE
OTHER AIRPLANES IN QUEUE
WAITING FOR THE RUNWAY.
THE TOWER CONTROLLERS CANNOT
SEE THOSE AIRPLANES WHICH IS A
SAFETY ISSUE.
>> SO I THINK WE SHOULD EXPAND
THE RUNWAY.
THANK THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
JUSZKIEWICZ
AND I'M JUST
GETTING A CHANCE SO GO AHEAD.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THIS IS ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ
CALLING FROM THE FOURTH WARD.
I'D LIKE TO TALK ABOUT DFS ONE
AND TWO REGARDING THE MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT AND THE QUESTION OF THE
RUNWAY EXTENSION.
THIS SEEMS LIKE A FAIRLY
MUNDANE CHANGE.
IT DOES NOT APPEAR TO LET
LARGER AIRPLANES USE THE
AIRPORT.
THEY CAN'T ALREADY USE IT BUT
WOULD RATHER ENABLE THOSE
OPERATIONS TO TAKE PLACE SAFELY
ON A FEW DAYS A YEAR WHEN
RUNWAY CONDITIONS OR DENSITY
ALTITUDE DUE TO HEAT OR
HUMIDITY PREVENT THEM IF WE'RE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO HAVE A
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT AND PERHAPS
WE SHOULD BE ASKING THIS
QUESTION, I THINK IT IS PRUDENT
TO BE MINDFUL OF SAFE
OPERATIONS AND MAKE SMART
INVESTMENTS IN THE
INFRASTRUCTURE, ESPECIALLY IF A
GRANT WILL PAY FOR IT.
THAT SAID, I DON'T HAVE STRONG
FEELINGS ONE WAY OR THE OTHER.
OTHERS SUCH AS MR. GARBER HAVE
SPOKEN ABOUT THE CARBON COST
OF AVIATION.
I WOULD HOWEVER LIKE TO ADDRESS
THE FACT THAT MANY OF THE
AIRPLANES FLYING OUT OF ARAB
UNLEADED GASOLINE THIS DOESN'T
REALLY HAVE MUCH TO DO WITH THE
RUNWAY EXTENSION BECAUSE THE
AIRCRAFT THAT WOULD BE MOST
AFFECTED BY THAT BURN JET FUEL
WHICH DOES NOT CONTAIN LEAD BUT
I THINK THAT BECAUSE WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT THE AIRPORT IT IS
RELEVANT ACCORDING TO A THREE
PRESS RELEASE FROM THE EPA
ANNOUNCING ITS DETERMINATION
LETTERS THAT READ IN AVIATION
IS A THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH
QUOTE THE SCIENCE IS CLEAR
EXPOSURE TO LEAD CAN CAUSE
IRREVERSIBLE AND LIFELONG
HEALTH EFFECTS IN CHILDREN,
SAID EPA ADMINISTRATOR MICHAEL
ESTRAGON.
AIRCRAFT THAT USE LEADED FUEL
ARE THE DOMINANT SOURCE OF LEAD
EMISSIONS IN OUR AIR WITH
TODAY'S ACTION, THE BIDEN
HARRIS ADMINISTRATION CAN MOVE
FORWARD IN THE PROCESS TO
PROPOSE NEW STANDARDS TO
PROTECT ALL COMMUNITIES FROM
THE SERIOUS THREAT OF LEAD
POLLUTION FROM AIRCRAFT
UNQUOTE.
THE PRESS RELEASE ALSO NOTES
THAT THE FAA AND INDUSTRY HAVE
BEEN WORKING ON A PROGRAM SINCE
2022 CALLED ELIMINATING
AVIATION GASOLINE LEAD
EMISSIONS OR EAGLE ONE OF THE
LEADERS IN THIS SPACE OUR FUEL
IS AN ANN ARBOR COMPANY AND
THEIR PRODUCT AND THEIR PRODUCT
GE ONE HUNDRED AS WELL AS AN
UNLEADED ALTERNATIVE THAT HAS
FAA APPROVAL TO BE USED IN MOST
OF THESE AIRPLANES UNDER A
SUPPLEMENTAL TYPE CERTIFICATE,
ACCORDING TO AN ARTICLE FROM
THE AIRCRAFT OWNERS AND PILOTS
ASSOCIATION REDHILL VIEW
OF SANTA CLARA COUNTY AIRPORT
AND SWITCHED ENTIRELY OVER TO
100 TO 100 AS WELL, PHASING OUT
THE SALES OF LEADED 112 YES.
HOWEVER, CITY COUNCIL VOTES
TONIGHT ON EXTENDING THE RUNWAY
.
I ASK THAT YOU PLEASE EXPLORE
WHATEVER AVENUES THE CITY MAY
PURSUE TO ACCELERATE THE LOCAL
TRANSITION AWAY FROM LEADED
GASOLINE.
THIS COULD MEAN WORKING WITH
OUR FUEL TO GET G ONE HUNDRED E
WELL AVAILABLE AT HRB EARLIER
AND EVENTUALLY PHASING OUT ONE
HUNDRED L.L.C. SALES.
I'VE SCOUTED LINKS TO THESE
ARTICLES ON THE NEW COUNCIL TAG
ON BLUE SKY THIRTY SECONDS
ANYONE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL
THE COUNCIL MEMBER
BRAKE'S THANKS COUNCIL MEMBER
CORNELL AND I ARE GOING TO BE
HAVING OUR MONTHLY BOARD
MEETING ON SUNDAY, DECEMBER
15TH AT FOUR P.M. WE ARE MOVING
TO VIRTUAL MEETINGS AT LEAST
FOR THE WINTER MAYBE BEYOND.
SO WE'LL BE SHARING THAT LINK
AS WE GET CLOSER TO THE DATE.
FOLKS CAN CONTACT US PERSONALLY
OR WE'LL ALSO BE SHARING IT VIA
WEBSITES AND SOCIAL MEDIA.
>> CASIMIRA ER THANK YOU.
>> JUST A QUICK UPDATE FROM THE
POLICY COMMITTEE FOR OUR
COUNCIL COLLEAGUES AND FOR THE
COMMUNITY AS LAMEDUCK IS
UNDERWAY IN THE STATE
LEGISLATURE WE ARE ACTIVELY
TRACKING A NUMBER OF BILLS THAT
ARE SEEING SOME ACTION IN
COMMITTEE AND FLOOR VOTES.
WE HAVE OUR LOBBYIST IN
LANSING.
WE WORK WITH THEM OF COURSE AND
THEY ARE TRACKING THESE BILLS
AND ENGAGING WHERE NECESSARY
EITHER BEHIND THE SCENES OR IN
COMMITTEES FOR US AND SO
SPECIFICALLY THE BILLS THAT
WE'RE REALLY PAYING ATTENTION
TO RIGHT NOW THERE'S THE
PACKAGE OF POLLUTER PAY BILLS
WHICH OF COURSE WOULD BE VERY
EXCITING TO SEE THOSE MOVED
THROUGH.
THERE IS THE STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT UTILITY ACT WHICH IS
OF GREAT INTEREST TO US HERE IN
ANN ARBOR AND THERE IS A
PACKAGE OF BILLS ACTUALLY THAT
ARE BEING UH, HEARD IN
COMMITTEE TOMORROW AT THE HOUSE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
RELATED TO HOUSING AND DOING A
NUMBER OF THINGS THAT WE ARE
ALREADY DOING HERE IN ANN ARBOR
BUT REQUIRING COMMUNITIES TO
SET PARKING MAXIMUMS UM RELAX
SOME IT REMOVES SOME RED TAPE
RELATED TO SITE PLANS MAKING
RESIDENTIAL DUPLEXES PERMITTED
BY WRIGHT IN SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING AND THEN CHANGING SOME
SOME FOOTPRINT AND BOUNDARY
RELATED ISSUES THOUGH.
SO THOSE WOULD BE EXCITING IF
THOSE WENT THROUGH AND JUST
WANTED TO UPDATE EVERYBODY ON
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN LANSING.
>> THANKS.
>> FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER CORNHILL
.
I BROUGHT THIS UP AT OUR LAST
MEETING BUT I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO REMIND FOLKS THAT
THIS WEEKEND FRIDAY NIGHT IS
MIDNIGHT MADNESS DOWNTOWN
.
IT'S IF YOU'VE GONE BEFORE THIS
IS GOING TO BE I THINK EXTRA
EXCITING.
THE ROADS WILL BE CLOSED.
THE STREETS DOWNTOWN WILL BE
CLOSED TO ALLOW FOR THE
COMMUNITY TO HAVE MORE SPACE
AND A LOT MORE ACTIVATIONS AND
SO I'M PRETTY EXCITED THAT
SANTA WILL BE THERE ON MAIN
STREET FROM SEVEN TO NINE P.M.
SANTA MAILBOX IS OUT IN FRONT
OF CONNOR O'NEAL'S PUB.
IF YOU PUT A LETTER IN THERE NO
MATTER YOUR AGE YOU WILL GET A
RESPONSE.
>> THERE WILL BE CAROLYN IRISH
DANCING.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT HAS TO
DO WITH CHRISTMAS BUT IT SOUNDS
EXCITING.
THERE'S A COCKTAIL, CARL,
THROUGHOUT THE SOCIAL DISTRICT
AS WELL.
A LOT OF STUFF IS GOING ON.
A LOT OF THE BUSINESSES
DOWNTOWN HAVE PUT A TON OF TIME
AND THOUGHTFULNESS INTO MAKING
THIS A GREAT EVENT FOR OUR
COMMUNITY AND SO I HOPE
EVERYONE WILL COME OUT AND
SHAMELESS PLUG IF YOU COME TO
THE ANN ARBOR ART CENTER YOU
CAN MAKE ALUMINUM FOR FREE AND
TAKE IT HOME WITH YOU FOR YOUR
OWN HOLIDAY CHEER.
SO COME ON OUT IN SUPPORT
DOWNTOWN IT REALLY IS.
THIS IS A REALLY LOW STRESS,
VERY FUN WAY TO COME DOWN AND
HAVE A NICE NIGHT ON MAIN
STREET COUNCIL BRACKMAN THANK
YOU, MAYOR.
I WANTED TO DRAW ATTENTION TO A
NOTE THAT WE RECENTLY GOT FROM
OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO LET
US KNOW THAT OUR THREE YEAR
ROAD BOND THAT WAS APPROVED
TWENTY TWENTY TWO HAS COME TO
ITS CONCLUSION THREE YEARS
FLIES BY FAST.
BUT NOW THAT THAT PERIOD IS
ENDED WE GOT THE VERY HAPPY
NEWS THAT THE CITY WAS ABLE TO
TREAT TWENTY FIVE POINT FIVE
ADDITIONAL SURFACE MILES DURING
THE THREE YEAR PERIOD.
THOSE ARE MILES THAT WOULD NOT
HAVE BEEN REPAIRED IN THAT TIME
OTHERWISE YOU CAN VIEW A FULL
MAP OF ALL OF THE PROJECTS THAT
WERE COMPLETED WITH THE ROAD
BOND.
IF YOU JUST LOOK UP ROAD BAND
ANN ARBOR ROADS YOU'LL SEE THIS
DASHBOARD A LOT OF WORD FOR
PROJECTS ON THE AIR BUT
OF COURSE THEY WERE ALL ACROSS
THE CITY.
SO I'D ENCOURAGE YOU TO LOOK
AND SEE WHAT WE WERE ABLE TO
ACCOMPLISH.
AND I WANT TO THANK OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR AND CITY STAFF
FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
COUNCIL
.
I WOULD LIKE TO REQUEST
CONFIRMATION OF THE FOLLOWING
REAPPOINTMENT.
SARAH PRESENTED TO CITY COUNCIL
ON NOVEMBER EIGHTEEN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR TO THE EMPLOYEES
RETIREMENT SYSTEM BOARD
OF TRUSTEES ALEX NURDIN AND TO
THE RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
NICHOLAS CROME.
HAVE A MOTION PLEASE MOVE BY
COUNCILMAN WATSON SECOND BY
COUNCILMAN BRITISH DISCUSSION
ON FAVOR POSED THEY ARE
APPROVED.
I'D LIKE TO REQUEST
CONFIRMATION THE FOLLOWING
APPOINTMENTS THAT WERE
PRESENTED TO CITY COUNCIL ON
NOVEMBER 18 20 24 TO THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION REBECCA NEUL
AND HANNAH LANE HAVE A MOTION.
PLEASE MOVE MY COUNCIL MEMBER
BECAUSE HE HAD BEEN TAKEN BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH DISCUSSION
ON FAVOR POSED THEY ARE
APPROVED.
I'D LIKE TO RECOMMEND THE
FOLLOWING APPOINTMENT FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION OF THE BOARD
OF REVIEW.
RYAN DIBBELL, CATHERINE WHITE
OH THREE APPOINTMENTS WE HAVE
BEFORE US TO CONSENT AGENDA MAY
HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE
THE CONSENT MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER ACKMANN 2ND BY COUNCIL
MCCONNELL DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA ON FAVOR OPPOSED
THE CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
WITH ELEVEN COUNCIL MEMBERS
PRESENT ALL VOTING IN THE
AFFIRMATIVE.
THE SATISFIED THE VOTE
REQUIREMENT EXPECT TO SEE A TWO
AND A SIX WE WE NOW COME TO A
PUBLIC HEARING.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THAT
PUBLIC HEARING TO SPEAK AT A
PUBLIC HEARING YOU NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT
YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS TO SAY
THE SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE AGENDA
TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HEARING
RELATES SPEAKERS INSTANCES WITH
HER HOME OR ONLINE WILL HAVE
THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY WHEN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
PLEASE CONCLUDE REMARKS AND
CEDE THE FLOOR PUBLIC HEARING
NUMBER ONE AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
SECTION TO THREE OF CHAPTER
TWENTY FIVE SOLID WASTE
OF TITLE TO UTILITIES AND
SERVICES OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY THEN HARBOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
THANKS MR. KENT GARBER AGAIN
THE PURPOSE OF THIS AMENDMENT
IS TO ENSURE AS I UNDERSTAND
IT, THAT TRASH AND RECYCLING
AND KAPPOS BINS ARE PLACED IN
BIKE LANES AND OBSTRUCT BIKE
TRAFFIC.
I WANT THANK COUNCIL MEMBERS
ACKMANN BRAKES AND DISH I
BELIEVE FOR COSPONSORING THIS.
THIS IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
THERE ARE ENOUGH HAZARDS FACING
BICYCLISTS ALREADY THIS HAS
BEEN A SORE POINT WITH ME
ENCOUNTERING THESE BINS IN BIKE
LANES TONIGHT I RODE DOWN HERE
LONG PLYMOUTH ROAD FROM THE
NIXON GREEN AREA AND JUST IN
THE SHORT STRETCH OF DETROIT
STREET AND NORTH FIFTH I HAD TO
SWERVE AROUND 11 DIFFERENT BEND
.
I ASSUME THAT IN THIS AREA
MONDAY MUST BE TRASH COLLECTION
SO I REALLY COMMEND COUNCIL FOR
CONSIDERING THIS.
>> I URGE YOU TO PASS IT TO
COMMON SENSE CHANGES AND YOU
KNOW IN SITUATIONS WHERE
HOMEOWNERS HAVE A STEEP BERM
AND FEEL COMPELLED TO PUT THEIR
BINS IN A BIKE LANE, IT
SPECIFIES THAT THE DRIVEWAY
WOULD BE A GOOD ALTERNATIVE AND
THAT SEEMS TO MAKE SENSE AND
SEEMS VERY WORKABLE.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY AGAIN TO SPEAK AND
I URGE PASSAGE OF THIS.
>> THANK.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC
?
I DON'T SEE ANY CALLERS IN LINE
WITH THEIR HANDS RAISED
SEE NO
ONE.
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US TO WORK
SESSION MINUTES OF NOVEMBER
TWELVE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR IN
THE REGULAR SESSION MEETING
MINUTES OF NOVEMBER 18.
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR MOVE A
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THESE
MINUTES BY COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF THE MINUTES OR IN FAVOR OR
OPPOSED THE MINUTES ARE
APPROVED BY ONE AUDIENCE TO
AMEND SECTION TO THREE
OF CHAPTER TWENTY SIX SOLID
WASTE OF TITLE TWO UTILITIES
AND SERVICES OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY THEN ARBER MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER AND SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER BRINGS DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF BE1 COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
I'M EXCITED TO TALK ABOUT THIS.
THIS IS OF COURSE FIRST READING
BUT I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU A
RUNDOWN ON WHAT'S SO GREAT HERE
BECAUSE IT'S REALLY QUITE
EXCITING AND I TO START WITH
REIMBURSEMENTS NOW IF I IF I'M
CRAZY YOU ARE SO EXCITED TO
TALK TO US ABOUT WHATEVER IT IS
YOU'RE ABOUT TO TALK TO US
ABOUT THAT YOU'VE YOU'VE YOU'VE
SKIPPED ITEMS OK, ALL I WANT TO
SAY ABOUT THE BIKE LANE GARBAGE
BAGS, THE GARBAGE CANS AND THE
BIKE LANES I KNOW WE DON'T CALL
THEM THAT THAT YOU KNOW.
YES.
MR. GARBER, IT IS NOT JUST
DODGE THE BIN.
>> IT'S ALSO DODGE WHAT IS
OFTEN LEFT BEHIND FROM WHEN THE
BINS ARE EMPTIED.
>> SO THERE'S GLASS THERE'S
BAGS OF STUFF THAT YOU DON'T
KNOW WHAT THEY ARE SO YOU DON'T
WANT TO RUN OVER THEM.
I LOOK FORWARD TO THAT NOT
BEING PART OF MY BIKE COMMUTE
TO AND I WILL WAIT MY TURN FOR
THE NEXT THING FURTHER
DISCUSSION COUNCILMAN RACKMAN.
>> YEAH, I JUST THOUGHT I WOULD
ADD A LITTLE BIT MORE CLARITY
TO THIS BECAUSE I THINK THAT
THERE WAS A LITTLE BIT
OF CONFUSION BECAUSE THE
REGULATIONS REGULATIONS BEFORE
DID SAY SOMETHING TO THE EFFECT
OF TRASH BINS NOT BEING ALLOWED
IN THE BIKE LANES.
THE ISSUE IS THAT OUR ORDINANCE
DID NOT SAY THAT AND SO THAT
CREATES A PROBLEM WHEN YOU WANT
TO CITE SOMEBODY FOR SOMETHING
AND TAKE IT TO ANY KIND
OF MAGISTRATE SO WHAT THIS DOES
IS WE TOOK A VERY SIMPLE
APPROACH TO UPDATING THE
ORDINANCE.
THAT'S WHY THERE'S NO
SPECIFICITY OUTLINED THERE.
IT'S JUST THAT TRASH BINS DO
NOT BELONG IN BIKE LANES AND
THEN THE REGS WHICH ARE WRITTEN
BY STAFF AND CAN CHANGE WITH
TIME WITHOUT COUNCIL APPROVAL
CAN BE CHANGED BECAUSE AS WE
KNOW WE HAVE A NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT CONFIGURATION AND
UNIQUE CASES.
YOU KNOW, SOMEONE MENTIONED
ABOUT HAVING STEEP EASEMENTS
AND NEEDING THE DRIVEWAY.
THERE'S PROBABLY THINGS THAT WE
HAVEN'T EVEN IMAGINED YET AND
THAT'S WHY IT'S BEST FOR STAFF
TO AMEND THESE AS NEEDED FOR
THE PARTICULAR BIKE
CONFIGURATION.
>> SO THANKS COUNCIL MEMBER
BRAKE'S JUST TO REPEAT A LITTLE
BIT OF WHAT I SAID LAST TIME
THANKS TO COUNCIL MEMBER
ACKMANN FOR TAKING THE LEAD ON
ON THIS AND YOU ATTORNEY RIISER
FOR WORKING SO DILIGENTLY TO TO
MAKE THESE AMENDMENTS.
I THINK THIS IS A NICE COMMON
SENSE IMPROVEMENTS TO MAKE OUR
BIKE LANES, OUR BIKE
INFRASTRUCTURE MORE USABLE IN
THE COMMUNITY.
YOU KNOW, IT'S WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE IT'S A BIT OF A THEME TO
MY COMMENTS TONIGHT WANT MAKE
SURE THAT OUR OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE INVEST
IN IS SAFE AND USABLE AND I
THINK WE'RE COMMITTED TO DOING
THAT AS A COMMUNITY.
>> SO THANKS FOR THE
DISCUSSION, COUNCILOR DENHA.
>> THANK YOU.
I WANT TO ALSO REITERATE MY
THANKS TO THE SPONSORS FOR
BRINGING THIS FORWARD AND FOR
WORKING WITH STAFF ON AN ISSUE
THAT HAS CERTAINLY BEEN A HOT
TOPIC IN THE COMMUNITY FOR A
WHILE NOW AND FOR WORKING
TOWARDS A SOLUTION I SHARED
WITH A COUPLE OF THE SPONSORS
OVER THE THE HOLIDAY THAT I HAD
BEEN CONTACTED BY SOME
CONSTITUENTS ABOUT
SOME OF THE
VERY KIND OF REGULATIONS THAT
MAYBE WE HAVEN'T EVEN THOUGHT
ABOUT YET.
AND SO I APPRECIATE COUNCILMAN
BRACKMAN FOR BRINGING UP THE
THAT THAT WILL BE KIND OF AN
ONGOING PIECE THAT CAN BE
MODIFIED AND DEVELOPED AS WE
ENCOUNTER DIFFERENT SCENARIOS
AND SO TO RESIDENTS WHO ARE
STILL THINKING ABOUT SOME
OF THE SCENARIOS THAT THEY
DON'T NECESSARILY QUITE KNOW
HOW IT WORKS OUT THERE.
THEIR LOCATION, PLEASE FEEL
FREE TO REACH OUT TO US AND WE
CAN MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
PASSING THOSE ALONG TO STAFF.
I KNOW SPECIFICALLY IN
SITUATIONS WHERE THERE ARE
MULTI MULTIPLE UNITS USING A
SINGLE DRIVEWAY AND AND HOW
THAT MIGHT BE IMPACTED BY BY IF
THERE'S A STEEP BERM AND THINGS
LIKE THAT AND SO THOSE ARE ALL
OF THE PIECES THAT ARE
ULTIMATELY GOING TO BE DEALT
WITH IN RIG SITE.
AND SO THERE ARE THINGS THAT WE
CAN CONTINUE TO LOOK AT AND
DEVELOP.
AND SO THANK YOU TO THE
COMMUNITY MEMBER WHO RAISED
THOSE ISSUES AND WE WILL
CONTINUE WORKING ON THEM.
>> THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION.
I'M GRATEFUL TO THE SPONSORS
FOR HIGHLIGHTING THIS ISSUE AND
FOR STAFF FOR WORKING WITH THEM
TO ACCOMPLISH WHAT I THINK IS A
PRETTY REASONABLE SOLUTION TO
AN ONGOING COMPLICATION.
OUR GOAL AS A MUNICIPAL
GOVERNMENT IS TO IMPROVE BASIC
SERVICES AND ENHANCE QUALITY
OF LIFE AND THAT THAT OFTEN
HAPPENS IN THE RIGHT OF WAY BY
THE PASSAGE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
WE ARE GOING TO CLARIFY AND BY
THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF SUBSEQUENT REGULATIONS WE'RE
GOING TO FURTHER EXPLAIN HOW IT
IS THAT THAT WE CAN LOOK TO USE
THE RIGHT OF WAY FOR AS MANY
PURPOSES AS POSSIBLE IN THIS
CONTEXT FOR THE EFFICIENT
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE AND
OF COURSE AS PART OF A CRUCIAL
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK I.E.
BIKE LANES.
IT'S A IT'S A GOOD BIKE LANES,
IT'S A IT'S A GOOD EFFORT.
IT'S A GOOD IMPLEMENTATION AND
I'M EXCITED THAT IT'S GOING TO
BE MOVING FORWARD.
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED.
SO YOU WANT AN ORDINANCE TO
AMEND SECTION FIVE TO TWO FIVE
TO SIX FIVE TO EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE FIVE THREE ZERO AND FIVE
THREE SEVEN OR CHAPTER 55
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE OF
TITLE FIVE OF THE CODE AND
STEPHEN ARBOR FENCE'S
REIMBURSEMENTS PUBLIC AND
PRIVATE UTILITIES MOVE BY
COUNCIL REDISH SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF C ONE
COUNCIL MEMBER TISH TAKE TWO I
MEAN TO START WITH
REIMBURSEMENTS SO CURRENTLY THE
CITY OFFERS A 50 PERCENT
REIMBURSEMENT OF APPLICATION
FEES TO A DEVELOPER WHO
PROVIDES AFFORDABLE HOUSING AS
PART OF A PROJECT.
NOW CURRENTLY DEVELOPMENTS WITH
ANY NUMBER OR PERCENTAGE
INCLUDING A SINGLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNIT ARE OFFERED
REIMBURSEMENT OF 50 PERCENT
OF FEES PAID ON LARGER
PROJECTS.
THIS IS A LUCRATIVE
REIMBURSEMENT AND THE CITY
SHOULD ENSURE TO A LINE THAT
WHAT WE ARE GIVING UP WARRANTS
WHAT WE ARE GETTING IN RETURN.
SO I WANT TO GIVE YOU A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES.
UNDER THE CURRENT RULES, A 20
STOREY 200 80000 SQUARE FOOT
BUILDING COULD BE REIMBURSED
FOR OVER TWELVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS OF TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
>> TOTAL FEES FOR DEDICATING
JUST FOUR PERCENT FLOOR AREA TO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNDER THE
NEW FORMULA INSTEAD OF TWELVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT
REIMBURSEMENT IF YOU OFFER IF
YOU DEDICATED FOUR PERCENT
OF YOUR FLOOR AREA TO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, THE
REIMBURSEMENT WOULD BE A LITTLE
OVER 500 DOLLARS.
THIS IS MONEY THAT WE WILL KEEP
IN THE CITY COFFERS IF YOU
APPROVE THIS ORDINANCE I WANT
TO GIVE YOU ONE MORE EXAMPLE.
IMAGINE A SITE PLANNED FOR 15
NEW BUILDINGS INCLUDING A HOTEL
EIGHT APARTMENT BUILDINGS,
THREE RESTAURANTS AND THREE
PARKING STRUCTURES TOTALING A
LITTLE OVER TWO MILLION SQUARE
FEET OF FLOOR AREA AND
INCLUDING 220 NINE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING DWELLING UNITS, WHICH
IS A GREAT THING BUT ACCOUNTING
FOR SIX PERCENT OF THE TOTAL
FLOOR AREA THAT PROJECT WOULD
NORMALLY REQUIRE ABOUT ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY MILLION WAIT
YOU KNOW ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS IN FEES.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
IT'S EXPENSIVE DEVELOP HERE BUT
NOT QUITE THAT EXPENSIVE.
>> THE CURRENT POLICY WOULD
REIMBURSE HALF OF THAT ALMOST
SIXTY THOUSAND DOLLARS.
THE PROPOSED POLICY WOULD
REIMBURSE THREE THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOUR DOLLARS
.
SO THIS IS AN IMPORTANT MOVE.
IT WOULD NOT AFFECT ENTIRELY
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
BUT WILL PRORATE REIMBURSEMENTS
FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS OR
DEVELOPMENTS THAT PROVIDE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DWELLING
UNITS ALONGSIDE MARKET RATE.
SO THESE ARE IMPORTANT I DO NOT
THINK THIS WILL DISSUADE PEOPLE
FROM INCLUDING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FEES BUT IT WILL ENSURE
THAT WE TAKE IN THE MONEY THAT
OUR STAFF NEEDS TO SERVICE
THESE PROJECTS WHICH IS QUITE A
LOT.
SO FENCES ARE YOU WILL NO
LONGER BE ABLE TO HAVE FENCES
WITH SHARP EDGES, BARBED WIRE
OR SPIKES THAT ARE NOT
DECORATIVE SPIKES AND YOU NEED
TO GET RID OF YOUR ELECTRIFIED
FENCE TOO IN A RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD ACCORDING TO THIS
AMENDMENT WE PROHIBIT ALL THOSE
THINGS IN NONREADERS AND WE
MIGHT AS WELL PROHIBIT THEM IN
RESIDENTIAL AREAS AS WELL.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF OTHER
THINGS ABOUT FENCES THAT I
DON'T THINK ARE INTERESTING THE
PUBLIC WELL THEN WE WILL JUST
LEAVE PUBLIC PRIVATE UTILITIES
TO YOUR OWN RESEARCH FURTHER
DISCUSSION
OF IN FAVOR OH I'M
SORRY.
DID YOU OPPOSE IT IS APPROVED
DO YOU SEE ONE RESOLUTION TO
ACCEPT GRANT FUNDS FROM THE
AMERICAN LUNG ASSOCIATION
APPROPRIATE THE CLIMB TO THE
CLIMATE MILLAGE FUND TO
REIMBURSE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
SEVEN THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED
TWENTY ONE DOLLARS FOR THE
PURCHASE OF TWO ELECTRIC REFUSE
TRUCKS MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON THAT CAN BUY KINSINGER
DISH DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC
ONE
.
FOR MY PART I WOULD LIKE TO
EXPRESS A GOOD DEAL OF THANKS
TO THE AMERICAN LUNG
ASSOCIATION FOR HAVING HAVING
THIS GRANT BEEP IN THEIR
PORTFOLIO IS A GRANT THAT WE
ARE USING TO VOTE FOR THE TITLE
OF THE OTHER RESOLUTION TO
SUPPORT THE PURCHASE OF TWO
ELECTRIC EFFUSED TRUCKS WHICH
WE ALREADY HAVE IN HAND.
THEY WERE A LONG TIME COMING
HAVING BEEN INITIALLY
AUTHORIZED IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE BUT NOW THEY ARE THERE
WITH US ARE BEING IN THE
PROCESS OF BEING FITTED FOR FOR
OUR PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND I'M
LOOKING FORWARD TO SEEING THEM
ON THE ROAD AND I'M LOOKING
FORWARD TO THE THE CITY
CONTINUING TO UTILIZE THE SIX
HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT WE WERE
RECEIVING BACK FROM THE FROM
THE AMERICAN LUNG ASSOCIATION
FOR THE GOOD AND GREAT PURPOSES
OF OUR EIGHT TWO ZERO PLANT FOR
THE DISCUSSION IN FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED FOR 11
COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT ALL
VOTED IN THE AFFIRMATIVE THUS
SATISFYING THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT DC TWO RESOLUTION
TO APPROVE THE 2025 COUNCIL TO
REMOVE A COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF TWO ON FAVOR OR POSED IT IS
APPROVED DC THREE RESOLUTION TO
APPROVE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
COUNCIL COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS
APPROVED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER.
THIS DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF WHENEVER THIS DC THREE
COUNCIL MEMBER OF DENHA YEAH
THANK YOU MAYOR.
I'LL JUST SAY BRIEFLY AS MOST
FOLKS KNOW WE REVISIT COUNCILOR
COMMITTEE BOARD OUR BOARD AND
COMMISSION APPOINTMENTS
ANNUALLY BUT PARTICULARLY AFTER
ELECTION YEAR WHEN WE HAVE NEW
FOLKS JOINING US THERE'S A NEED
TO TO DIG IN A LITTLE DEEPER
AND MAKE SURE THAT WE ARE
ALIGNING OUR COUNCIL
ASSIGNMENTS WITH OPPORTUNITIES
FOR LEADERSHIP ON THE BOARD BUT
ALSO TO REALLY LEAN INTO
INDIVIDUAL INTEREST AREAS
OF EXPERTIZE.
AND SO THANKS TO EVERYBODY FOR
WORKING WITH US TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE COULD MAKE SPACE FOR
OUR NEW COUNCIL MEMBER TO
EXPLORE SOME OF THE AREAS THAT
HE HAS INTEREST IN AND THAT
CERTAINLY HE WILL LEND
EXPERTIZE TO BUT ALSO FOR YOUR
CONTINUED SERVICE ON ALL THE
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS THAT YOU
SERVE.
>> SPEAKING OF CONTINUED
SERVICE AND AND THANKS FOR
DOING THAT FOR MY PART I WANT
TO EXTEND SOME SOME
RECOGNITION, HONOR AND
GRATITUDE TO COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA MAYOR PRO TEM DENHA IN
THIS CONTEXT IT IS IT'S A
SPREADSHEET OF GLORY THE THE
VARIOUS HOPES AND DREAMS OF OUR
OF OUR ELEVEN COUNCIL MEMBERS
PLUS WITH THE HOWEVER MANY
COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS AND
SO FORTH THAT WE HAVE GETTING
THAT ALL TOGETHER IS A LITTLE
BIT OF A LITTLE BIT OF AN
OPERATION AND IT'S NOT DONE
WITHOUT DILIGENCE AND
CONVERSATION AND NUANCE
DELICACY ALL THINGS WHICH WHICH
COUNCIL MEMBER OF DENHA
POSSESSES.
AND SO I JUST WANT TO SAY THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR TAKING THE
LABORING ON THIS.
I AND I'M TOLD ALL OF US ARE
GRATEFUL SO THANK YOU FOR THE
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OPPOSED IT
IS APPROVED.
YES.
ONE RESOLUTION TO APPROVE A
GRANT CONTRACT WITH THE
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION AND
ENGINEERING SERVICES FOR THE
SAFETY EXTENSION OF DETROIT SIX
TO FOUR AT THE ANN HARBOR
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
THE AMOUNT OF SIX HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THREE THOUSAND TWO
HUNDRED DOLLARS MOVED BY
COUNCILMAN BRIGGS SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER KERNOW
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC ONE I
BELIEVE WE HAVE AN INTRODUCTION
FOR BOTH DC ONE AND I THINK WE
CAN BOTHER THEM TO TO MR. MR.
KLARIK
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS PARTICLE HANEKOM.
NIKOLAY SOLTYS MANAGER FOR THE
CITY AM ALSO THE AIRPORT
MANAGER SERVING THAT ROLE
SERVING THAT ROLE FOR ABOUT THE
LAST EIGHTEEN YEARS.
YOU HAVE TWO ITEMS IN FRONT
OF YOU THIS EVENING THAT BOTH
OF THEM DEAL WITH THE DESIGN
WORK FOR THE PROPOSED RUNWAY
SAFETY EXTENSION PROGRAM.
FIRST ONE WOULD BE TO ACCEPT
THE GRANT FOR THAT FROM THE FAA
AND I'M NOT AERONAUTICS WITH A
SMALL LOCAL SHARE FROM COMING
FROM AIRPORT FUNDS AND THEN THE
SECOND ITEM ON THE AGENDA WOULD
BE THE ACTUAL DESIGN CONTRACT
FOR THAT PROJECT.
I REALLY HAVE PROVIDED A LOT
OF INFORMATION TO YOU AND I
APPRECIATE THOSE OF YOU THAT
HAVE GONE THROUGH EVERYTHING,
RESPONDED TO COUNCIL QUESTIONS
,CAUCUS QUESTIONS AND REALLY
I'M JUST HERE AVAILABLE TO
ANSWER QUESTIONS THAT YOU MAY
HAVE.
THANK YOU, MR. DUNN.
YEAH, I JUST WHILE YOU WERE
THERE UP YOU COME BACK USUALLY
IN AN INTRODUCTION WE GET DO WE
GET TO ASK THIS OR NOT IF THERE
HAVE BEEN QUESTIONS THAT HAVE
PREVIOUSLY BEEN DELIVERED?
OH YES.
IF NOT THEN YOU CAN ASK STAFF
MEMBERS QUESTIONS BUT THOSE
COUNT AGAINST YOUR TIME DURING
THE COURSE.
OUR CONVERSATION
I DID SUBMIT
SEVERAL QUESTIONS AHEAD OF TIME
AND THEY ARE LISTED AS STAFF
RESPONSES WILL BE FORTHCOMING.
SO I THINK LET'S UNDERSTAND
THIS FORTHCOMING.
>> THERE YOU GO.
OK, WE CAN PROVIDE RESPONSES TO
THOSE THREE QUESTIONS THAT YOU
SUBMITTED IF YOU'D LIKE.
YES, THEY'D BE GREAT.
THE STUFF I HAVE WITH ME
TO
HAVE YOUR GLASSES HERE
SO YOU
THE FIRST QUESTION ASK WAS THE
BUDGET IMPACT AT THE DECEMBER
CITY COUNCIL MEETING COUNCIL
BEING ASKED TO CONSIDER A
RESOLUTION TO APPROVE A GRANT
CONTRACT FOR ENGINEERING
SERVICES RELATED THE PROPOSED
PROJECT THE INAUGURAL DISPLAY
REPORT?
WELL, THE GRANT CONTRACT ONLY
REQUIRES A SMALL PORTION
OF FUNDS FROM THE CITY THAT
WILL COME FROM THE AIRPORT FUND
OPERATIONS MAINTENANCE BUDGET.
WHAT IS THE ANTICIPATED C
CONTRIBUTION FROM THE ACTUAL
CONSTRUCTION COMPONENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT
AS PROPOSED AND FROM WHAT CITY
BUDGET WILL THE EXPECTED FUNDS
COME FROM?
SO THE ESTIMATED CONSTRUCTION
PROJECT ON THIS IS ABOUT TEN
MILLION DOLLARS OUR SHARE WON'T
EXCEED FIVE PERCENT OF THAT SO
ABOUT APPROXIMATELY 500000 WILL
BE LOCAL SHARE.
THOSE FUNDS ARE CURRENTLY
AVAILABLE IN THE AIRPORT
OPERATING BUDGET AND AIRPORT
FUND BALANCE SO WE'VE BEEN
PLANNING FOR THIS PROJECT FOR
OBVIOUSLY MANY YEARS AND WE
HAVE A FUND SET ASIDE TO
ADDRESS THOSE SECOND QUESTION I
THINK WAS PARTIALLY RELATED TO
THE ANSWER ON THE FIRST
QUESTION LONG TERM BUDGET
IMPACT WHAT'S THE ANTICIPATED
LONG TERM BUDGET IMPACT ON THE
AIRPORT PROJECT AS PROPOSED IN
THE CITY COMPARED TO THE
ANTICIPATED LONG TERM BUDGET
IMPACT ON THE CITY IF THE NO
ACTION ALTERNATIVE IS TAKEN?
SO AGAIN BECAUSE THE FUNDS ARE
COMING FROM THE AIRPORT FUND
THERE'S NO IMPACT ON THE CITY'S
GENERAL FUND AND THE FUNDS
AVAILABLE AND REQUIRED FOR THIS
PROJECT FOR THE LOCAL SHARE ARE
CURRENTLY AVAILABLE SO THERE
WOULD NOT BE AN IMMEDIATE OR A
LONG TERM BUDGET IMPACT ITS
FUNDING THAT'S AVAILABLE
ALREADY BEEN SET ASIDE FOR THIS
THIRD QUESTION IS THE SAFETY
EXTENDED SAFETY IMPACT MUCH
OF THE SAFETY EXTENSION
OF RUNWAY TWO SIX TWO FOR THE
INTERIOR MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
PROJECT EMPHASIZES SAFETY IS A
PRIMARY GOAL.
DOES AN ALTERNATIVE POSSIBLY
EXIST WHERE NEEDED SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS SUCH AS THE
INSTALLATION OF NEW
NAVIGATIONAL AIDS RUNWAY
LIGHTING CAN BE MADE WITHOUT
BUILDING AN EXTENSION OF THE
EXISTING RUNWAY.
IF THE ANSWER IS YES, WHO WOULD
BE RESPONSIBLE FOR FUNDING THE
SAFETY IMPROVEMENT?
SO WE'VE EXPLORED THAT SCENARIO
WITH THE FAA WITH THEM THAT AS
PART OF THIS PROJECT COULD WE
DO JUST THE RUNWAY SHIFT AND
THE EXTENSION TO ADDRESS
THINGS?
COULD WE DO CERTAIN COMPONENTS
OF IT?
AND FROM THE FAA PERSPECTIVE,
OUR AIRPORT DOES NOT MEET
CURRENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
THE LENGTH IS ONE ISSUE.
THE TOWER LINE SITE IS ANOTHER
ISSUE.
THERE'S SOME GEOMETRIC ISSUES
WHERE THE TAXIWAYS DON'T LINE
UP TO THE EXISTING RUNWAY
CORRECTLY TO MEET CURRENT
DESIGN STANDARDS.
OBVIOUSLY THEY HAVE DESIGN
STANDARDS FOR A REASON BUT OUR
AIRPORT DOES NOT NEED THEM.
THEY ARE WILLING TO FUND THE
ENTIRE PROJECT AND SO BECAUSE
THAT THEY WOULD EXPECT US TO DO
THE ENTIRE PROJECT NOT
PIECEMEAL TO WORK IF THAT WERE
THE PURPOSE OF WHAT WE'D WANT
TO DO, WE'D HAVE TO PROVIDE
FUNDING LOCALLY AS OPPOSED TO
USING FAA GRANTS.
I THINK THOSE WERE THE THREE
QUESTION QUESTIONS YOU AND
THANK YOU.
YES SIR.
COULD YOU ADDRESS COUNCILMAN
BRIGGS QUESTION ABOUT THE
RUNWAY IMPROVEMENTS WOULD PUT
THE CITY'S WATER SUPPLY AT
RISK.
IT'S A SEPARATE SHEET.
>> YOU MIGHT NOT HAVE IT OK THE
YEAH, THAT'S YOU KNOW, THAT'S
BEEN AN ISSUE.
SO WE HAVE THREE WATER WELLS
DOWN LOCATED THE AIRPORT AND
THOSE THREE COMBINED TYPICALLY
PROVIDE ABOUT FIVE TO 10
PERCENT OF THE CITY'S WATER.
AS YOU KNOW, MOST OF THE WATER
COMES FROM HERE ON RIVER.
SO WE ARE IN THE THREE FIRES
AQUIFER AND IN THE WELLHEAD
PROTECTION ZONE FOR THOSE
WELLS.
NOW KEEP IN MIND THAT WELLHEAD
PROTECTION ZONE COVERS A GOOD
CHUNK OF PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP.
IT EXPANDS TO SILO CHURCH ROAD
PAST WAGGNER OVER TO ST. SCHOOL
ROAD AND AS FAR SOUTH AS ALMOST
US TWELVE WHAT'S A VERY LARGE
AQUIFER?
PART OF 94 RUNS THROUGH THAT
SAME WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE.
THE PROJECT DOES NOT IMPACT AND
THE SOMETHING THAT WAS LOOKED
AT IN THE STUDY PROJECT DOES
NOT IMPACT THE WELL PROTECTION
.
IT DOES NOT IMPACT THE WELLS.
THERE'S NO CONSTRUCTION GOING
ON AROUND THE WELLS.
THE IMPACT THAT WAS POTENTIAL
IMPACT THAT WAS MENTIONED WAS
WE'LL BE ADDING ABOUT ONE POINT
EIGHTY EIGHT ACRES
OF IMPERVIOUS SURFACE WITH THE
ADDITIONAL PAVEMENT THAT WAS
PUT IN AND AGAIN THAT'S WHAT
THEY WOULD CONSIDER A DE
MINIMUS IMPACT TO THE WELLHEAD
PROTECTION AREA.
SO AS LISTED IN THE
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT,
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF NEGLIGIBLE
IMPACT TO THE CITY'S WELLS FROM
A SAFETY PERSPECTIVE.
I'D GO ON TO ADD ON THAT THAT
IF YOU LOOK AT, YOU KNOW,
POTENTIAL FOR FUELING ISSUES OR
THOSE TYPE OF THINGS IN
AIRCRAFT CRASH AGAIN IMPROVING
THE SAFETY AT THE AIRPORT,
REDUCING CRASHES ARE ALL THINGS
THAT ARE GOING TO HAVE A
POSITIVE IMPACT ON THE
PRODUCTION
ON.
THANK YOU AND THANKS TO
EVERYBODY WHO'S COME AND COME
TO SPEAK WITH TONIGHT OR WROTE
US.
UNFORTUNATELY THERE REMAIN A
NUMBER OF MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT
THE AIRPORT SAFETY IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT SO I'D LIKE TO BEGIN BY
REITERATING THAT THE GOAL
OF THIS PROJECT ISN'T TO EXPAND
THE AIRPORT OR BRING IN MORE
JETS NOR WILL IT CAUSE SAFETY
RISKS FOR NEARBY RESIDENTS.
I RECOGNIZE THAT SOME RESIDENTS
AND NEIGHBORS DON'T LIKE THE
FACT THAT THE AIRPORT SERVES AS
A PILOT TRAINING FACILITY.
BUT THIS ACTIVITY ISN'T NEW.
IT'S BEEN A PILOT TRAINING
FACILITY SINCE NINETEEN THIRTY
NINE AND THAT ACTIVITY WON'T
SHIFT IF THIS PROJECT IS VOTED
DOWN.
OUR AIRPORT IS ONE OF THE
OLDEST AIRPORTS IN THE UNITED
STATES WITH THE FIRST FLIGHT
OCCURRING IN 1928 LONG BEFORE
THE HALF MILLION A MILLION
DOLLAR HOMES WERE BUILT NEARBY.
CURRENT OPERATIONS HAVE
OBVIOUSLY NOT NEGATIVELY
IMPACTED RESIDENTIAL OR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE
AREA AND PERHAPS THAT IS
BECAUSE THE AIRPORT IS A CLASS
B TO FACILITY AND THIS PROJECT
WOULD NOT ALTER THAT.
THE AIRPORT HAS THE SMALLEST
RUNWAY OF ANY FAA TOWER AIRPORT
IN MICHIGAN AND IT WILL REMAIN
THAT WAY IF THE RUNWAY IS
EXTENDED AS PROPOSED.
BUT BECAUSE IT HAS SUCH A SHORT
RUNWAY OUR AIRPORT IS
EXPERIENCED.
EIGHTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE
RUNWAY OVERRUNS FAA TOWER AT
AIRPORTS IN MICHIGAN IN THE
LAST APPROXIMATELY 25 YEARS THE
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
AND AERONAUTICS OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR, OUR AIRPORT
MANAGER AND AIRPORT ADVISORY
COMMISSION ALL BELIEVE THAT
IMPROVEMENTS ARE NEEDED TO
ENSURE OUR SMALL AIRPORT
FUNCTIONS MORE SAFELY,
EFFICIENTLY AND IN ACCORDANCE
WITH BEST PRACTICE.
SO LET'S TALK ABOUT THE PEOPLE
WHO WILL GET SERVED BY THESE
IMPROVEMENTS.
I'VE ALREADY MENTIONED THAT OUR
AIRPORT PRIMARILY FUNCTIONS AS
A PILOT TRAINING FACILITY.
THESE ARE OUR NEIGHBORS, OUR
COLLEAGUES, PEOPLE THAT WE CARE
ABOUT THAT INCLUDES YOUTH
PILOTS LEARNING THE CRAFT.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
HOSPITAL OPERATES SURVIVAL
FLIGHT HELICOPTER FLEET OUT
OF THE AIRPORT AND THE NORTH
FLIGHT EMS FLIES IN PATIENTS IN
NEED OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TREATMENT AT LOCAL HOSPITALS.
WINGS OF MERCY AND ANGEL
FLIGHTS REGULARLY FLY IN AND
OUT OF THE ANIBA AIRPORT.
THESE ARE NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WORK WITH
PILOTS WHO DONATE THEIR TIME
AND TRANSPORT INDIVIDUALS IN
NEED OF MEDICAL TREATMENT WHO
CANNOT OTHERWISE AFFORD TO
TRAVEL INCLUDING MEDICAL
TREATMENTS NO LONGER LEGAL IN
OTHER STATES.
SOME BELIEVE THAT IMPROVEMENTS
ARE NECESSARY BECAUSE WE'LL RUN
AIRPORT IS SO CLOSE BY AND SOME
RESIDENTS GET ANNOYED BY
CURRENT OPERATIONS.
WE KNOW THAT WE ARE ALREADY
DIVERTING FUEL AROUND FLIGHTS
THAT WISH TO LAND IN ANN ARBOR.
I WOULD SUGGEST THAT THIS IS
UNJUST REDIRECTING FLIGHTS OVER
MAJORITY BLACK AND LATINO
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE THE AVERAGE
HOME VALUE IS UNDER 200000
BECAUSE ARE MUCH MORE AFFLUENT
WHITE COMMUNITY DOES NOT WISH
TO SEE OR HEAR THEM IS
INAPPROPRIATE TONIGHT WE HAVE
THE RESPONSIBILITY TO
DEMONSTRATE THAT WE CAN
CONTINUE TO BE RESPONSIBLE
STEWARDS THIS IMPORTANT
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
FACILITY FURTHER WE ARE NOT
GOING TO CONTINUE TO ENTERTAIN
REQUESTS TO CONTINUE TO
REDIRECT FLIGHTS OVER LESS
AFFLUENT COMMUNITIES IN EVERY
OTHER AREA OF OUR COUNCIL
DISCUSSIONS WE PRIORITIZE
EQUITY AND ADHERING TO BEST
PRACTICES AND TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY.
I WOULD ENCOURAGE MY COLLEAGUES
TO JOIN ME IN VOTING YES
TONIGHT
.
THANK YOU MAYOR TAYLOR, ON THE
ADVICE OF OUR COUNCIL TO REALLY
LITIGATION, I DON'T PLAN TO GET
INTO TOO MANY OF THE SPECIFICS
WITH RESPECT TO MY OPPOSITION
TONIGHT BUT FOR SEVERAL REASONS
AND BECAUSE I ULTIMATELY OPPOSE
EXTENDING THE RUNWAY AT THE
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT, I'LL BE
VOTING NO ON BOTH ONE AND TWO
AND I URGE MY COLLEAGUES TO
JOIN ME IN VOTING AGAINST THESE
PROPOSALS.
WHAT I WILL SAY IS THAT ANN
ARBOR IS AN ECONOMIC
HEAVYWEIGHT IN OUR REGION AND I
BELIEVE WE HAVE BOTH AN
OPPORTUNITY AND A
RESPONSIBILITY TO INITIATE A
COOPERATIVE AND COLLABORATIVE
REGIONAL DIALOG WITH MUNICIPAL
NEIGHBORS ABOUT BIG ISSUES THAT
IMPACT OUR ENTIRE REGION ON
THIS ISSUE.
WE HAVEN'T ALWAYS BEEN GOOD
NEIGHBORS TONIGHT WE ARE
PRESENTED WITH AN OPPORTUNITY
TO TURN THE PAGE ON A DECADES
OLD CONTROVERSY AND
MEANINGFULLY ENGAGE OUR
MUNICIPAL PARTNERS SPECIFIC
THOSE IN PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP
WHICH IS WHERE OUR MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT IS LOCATED AND WHICH
HAS FERVENTLY OPPOSED TO THIS
PROPOSED EXPANSION SINCE ITS
CONCEPTION
WITH THE COUNTY WITH
WILLOW RUN AND WITH OTHER KEY
REGIONAL, STATE AND FEDERAL
STAKEHOLDERS ABOUT BROADER
REGIONAL AIR TRANSIT AND
TRAINING NEEDS AND THE BEST WAY
TO MEET THOSE NEEDS IN THE LONG
TERM WE SHOULD DO THIS IN A WAY
THAT ACKNOWLEDGES THE BROADER
REDEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH IN THE
SOUTH STATE STREET AREA AND
CONSIDERS THE HIGHEST AND BEST
USE OF LAND IN THE AREA AND
ACKNOWLEDGES THE ONGOING
EXPANSION AND GROWTH OF WILLOW
RUN THEIR DESIRE TO SERVE THE
BROADER REGION AND THAT
ACKNOWLEDGES OUR WATER
INTERESTS AND THE QUALITY
OF LIFE OF NEARBY RESIDENTS AND
GREATER CLIMATE IMPACTS.
I LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
STAFF TO EXPLORE HOW WE CAN
MOVE THIS CONVERSATION FORWARD
AND I WILL BE VOTING NO
BECAUSE
I AM THE NEWEST COUNCIL MEMBER
I BELIEVE I AM PROBABLY ALSO
LIKELY THE NEWEST MEMBER TO
THIS ISSUE, NOTING THAT THE
PLANNED UPGRADES AND EXPANSION
HAVE BEEN CONSIDERED FOR GOING
ON TWO DECADES OR MORE.
>> MUCH OF THAT HISTORY IS
POLITICAL HISTORY WHO HAS BEEN
SUPPORTIVE, WHO HAS NOT BEEN IN
WHY I UNFORTUNATELY DID NOT
HAVE AS MUCH TIME AS I WOULD
HAVE LIKED TO STUDY UP ON THIS
HISTORY AND LEARN THEIR
REASONS.
SO I BASE MY DECISION TODAY
LARGELY ON THE FACTS PRESENTED
TO ME ON THE PROJECT AS A WHOLE
AND SPECIFICALLY ON THE
ECONOMICS OF BOTH OUR VOTE
TODAY ON THE ENGINEERING
CONTRACT AND ALSO THE FUTURE
PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION AND
CONSTRUCTION OF THE PROJECT.
SHOULD WE ACCEPT THE GRANT?
>> I WANT TO THANK CITY STAFF
FOR PROVIDING ME EXTENSIVE
BACKGROUND INFORMATION IN A
SHORT AMOUNT OF TIME AND THE
MINI CITY RESIDENTS FOR
PROVIDING THEIR VERY, VERY
DETAILED INPUT THESE PAST FEW
WEEKS I WAS ABLE TO READ IT ALL
AND TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION I
WAS ALSO FORTUNATE TO RECEIVE A
TOUR OF OUR AIRPORT THIS
MORNING THE GRANT IN FRONT
OF COUNCIL TODAY FOR
CONSIDERATION IS FOR JUST OVER
600000 DOLLARS WITH THE CITY
KICKING IN JUST UNDER TWENTY
THREE THOUSAND OR AROUND THREE
POINT FIVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL
WITH THE REST BEING COVERED BY
FEDERAL AND STATE GRANTS.
THIS IS A PRETTY GOOD DEAL
ESPECIALLY IF YOU FACTOR IN
THAT THE CITY FUNDS ARE COMING
FROM THE AIRPORT FUND, NOT OUR
CITY'S GENERAL FUND.
AS WE HEARD EARLIER, THE ACTUAL
CONSTRUCTION PHASE OF THIS
PROJECT WOULD LIKELY COST
AROUND TEN MILLION DOLLARS WITH
THE CITY AGAIN FOOTING THE BILL
FOR A PORTION CLOSE TO FIVE
PERCENT OR SOMEWHERE AROUND
500000.
THESE FUNDS WOULD AGAIN COME
FROM THE AIRPORT FUND, NOT THE
CITY'S GENERAL FUND RECEIVING
AND INVESTMENT OF THIS SIZE FOR
AROUND HALF A MILLION DOLLARS
WHILE COMPENSATING ALL STATED
GOALS DETERMINED BY PRIOR
COUNCILS FOR THIS PROJECT AND
BRINGING OUR INFRASTRUCTURE UP
TO MODERN DAY SAFETY AND
EFFICIENCY LEVELS IS A LOT
OF BANG FOR OUR BUCK EVEN MORE
SO CONSIDERING THE NEARLY
200000 TOTAL PASSENGERS IN 2023
THAT USE OUR CITY ASSET.
WHILE I CONSIDERED MANY FACTORS
AND HEARD THE GREAT ARGUMENTS
ON BOTH SIDES OF THIS ISSUE IN
THE LEAD UP TO TODAY, THESE
FACTORS AND ARGUMENTS WEIGHED
MOST HEAVILY IN THE OUTCOME
OF MY VOTE.
>> THANK YOU.
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCILOR
HARRISON.
I WOULD THANK YOU MAYOR.
FIRST I'D LIKE TO SAY THAT MY
THOUGHTS ARE THAT AND APPROVING
THIS EXPANSION IS INCOMPATIBLE
WITH OUR COMMUNITIES URGENT
GOALS TO LOWER CARBON EMISSIONS
,PRIVATE AND CARGO JETS ARE
SOME OF THE MOST
CARBON INTENSIVE FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION AND THE LONG
TERM IMPACT OF OUR CLIMATE AND
QUALITY OF LIFE CANNOT BE
DISMISSED.
WHILE WE ASK RESIDENTS
OF BUSINESSES TO REDUCE THEIR
CARBON FOOTPRINTS THROUGH
BEHAVIORAL AND OPERATIONAL
CHANGES.
TO ME IT SEEMS HYPOCRITICAL TO
APPROVE A PROJECT THAT WOULD
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE
EMISSIONS IN OUR AREA.
WHILE THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
REPORT CLAIMS THE PROJECT WILL
NOT RESULT IN SUBSTANTIAL HARM,
WE KNOW THAT TECHNICAL
ASSESSMENTS DON'T ALWAYS
CAPTURE THE FULL SCOPE OF WHAT
COMMUNITIES EXPERIENCE.
WE SHOULD HOLD OURSELVES TO A
HIGHER STANDARD ESPECIALLY
GIVEN OUR CLIMATE COMMITMENTS.
SECONDLY, YOU KNOW WE DO
ALREADY HAVE A WELL-RUN AIRPORT
NEARBY WHICH IS SIGNIFICANT
SPECIFICALLY DESIGNED TO HANDLE
CARGO PLANES.
I FEEL THAT EXPANDING AND
ARBOR'S AIRPORT FOR SIMILAR
PURPOSES IS REDUNDANT AND IT
CREATES UNNECESSARY
ENVIRONMENTAL AND QUALITY
OF LIFE BURDENS FOR OUR POOR,
OUR NEIGHBORS AND PITTSVILLE TO
THESE RESIDENTS LIVE WITH THE
IMMEDIATE NOISE POLLUTION AND
DISRUPTION CAUSED BY AIRPORT
OPERATIONS AND THEIR CONCERN.
THEIR CONCERNS DO DESERVE
SERIOUS WEIGHT.
I STRONGLY SUPPORT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT BUT IT MUST BE
INCLUSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE.
TRUE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LIFTS
COMMUNITIES EQUITABLY, PROTECTS
THE ENVIRONMENT AND RESPECTS
THE WELL-BEING OF ALL RESIDENTS
NOT JUST A SELECT FEW.
THIS PROPOSAL DOES NOT MEET
THOSE STANDARDS IN MY OPINION.
INSTEAD IT COMPROMISES
ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP AND
BURDENS NEIGHBORING COMMUNITIES
ALL WHILE DUPLICATING EXISTING
INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND FOR THAT REASON I WILL NOT
BE SUPPORTING EITHER TONIGHT.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
.
I HAVE NO REASON TO DISAGREE
WITH THE FINDING OF NO
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT BECAUSE IT
WAS ARRIVED AT THROUGH THE SAME
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
PROCESS THE CITY PARTICIPATES
IN FOR PROJECTS SUCH AS OUR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
ON CATHERINE STREET AT DUNBAR
TOWER.
HOWEVER, I'M NOT SURE THAT A
RUNWAY EXTENSION THAT THE
COMMUNITY WAS INTERESTED IN
PURSUING MORE THAN A DECADE AGO
IS SOMETHING THAT IT CONTINUES
TO WISH TO PURSUE GOING FORWARD
.
IN FACT, I'M HEARING THE
OPPOSITE FROM CONSTITUENTS FOR
THIS REASON I'LL BE VOTING NO.
I WANTED TO MAKE TWO COMMENTS
ON THINGS UNRELATED TO THE
COUNTERTERRORISM COMMUNITY
RELATED TO THE EXPANSION BUT
NOT DIRECTLY AFFECTED AND ONE
IS THAT THE IDEA OF THE USE
OF FUEL ONE OF THE BIG ISSUES
WITH UNLEADED FUEL IS ITS USE
FOR SINGLE ENGINE AIRCRAFT.
LET US USE THE FUEL TO PREVENT
ENGINE OK?
AND THAT BECOMES A MUCH BIGGER
ISSUE WHEN WHEN IT'S A SINGLE
PISTON ENGINE AIRCRAFT AS MANY
THAT COME BE IN OTHER AIRPORTS
.
SO THE FAA HAS LAUNCHED AN
INITIATIVE TO ELIMINATE
AVIATION GAS LED EMISSIONS AND
THEIR GOAL IS TO DO THAT BY
2030 AND THEY ARE WORKING ON
FUELS SUCH AS THE ONE SO THE
COMMENTERS MENTIONED AND ALSO
GRATEFUL FOR THE WORK THE
AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE HAS
DONE TO CREATE A NOISE
ABATEMENT PROGRAM INCLUDING A
BROCHURE DISTRIBUTED TO PILOTS
WITH RECOMMENDED ARRIVAL AND
DEPARTURE PROCEDURES TO REDUCE
NOISE.
I THINK WE ARE IN FACT BEING
GOOD NEIGHBORS.
THEY HAVE ALSO ASKED PILOTS TO
REFRAIN FROM PATTERN TRAFFIC,
REPETITIVE SHUTDOWNS, THE
LANDINGS DURING THE HOLIDAYS
WHEN RESIDENTS ARE MOST LIKELY
TO BE ENJOYING TIME OUTSIDE
MEMORIAL DAY, FOURTH OF JULY
AND LABOR DAY.
THIS IS A TESTAMENT TO THE
BENEFITS OF COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT
OF THE AIRPORT COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH.
THANK YOU AND THANK YOU TO THE
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO HAVE
SPOKEN AND THANK YOU COLLEAGUES
FOR YOUR VERY THOUGHTFUL WORDS.
SO THE END OF OUR AIRPORT IS
THE FOURTH BUSIEST AIRPORT IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN BEHIND
DETROIT METRO OAKLAND COUNTY
INTERNATIONAL.
TRAVERSE CITY.
SO IT IS PROBABLY SERVING NEEDS
AS PER COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG'S
THE PROPOSED CHANGES WILL NOT
MAKE THE AIRPORT SIGNIFICANTLY
BUSIER.
IT WILL NOT ALLOW LARGER PLANES
TO LAND BUT IT WILL MAKE THE
AIRPORT QUITE A BIT SAFER IF
THE CITY DOES NOT MAKE THESE
CHANGES.
THIS AIRPORT WILL NOT GO AWAY.
IT WILL CONTINUE TO OPERATE AS
IT CURRENTLY OPERATES.
ITS CARBON EMISSIONS WILL
PROBABLY NOT CHANGE
SIGNIFICANTLY BECAUSE WE DO NOT
EXPECT SIGNIFICANTLY MORE
TRAFFIC AND CERTAINLY NOT
LARGER PLANES.
THE PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS HAVE
SOME ELEMENTS THAT WILL BENEFIT
ANN ARBOR RESIDENTS.
THERE WILL BE LESS NOISE AS
PROPOSED BOTH RUNWAY ENDS WOULD
BE FARTHER AWAY FROM THE CITY
WHICH MEANS THAT THE PLANES
WILL BE FLYING COMING IN AT A
HIGHER ALTITUDE WHICH WILL
REDUCE AIRCRAFT NOISE FOR CITY
OF ANN ARBOR RESIDENTS.
AS WE'VE SAID, A NUMBER
OF TIMES, THERE WILL NOT BE
BIGGER PLANES.
I THINK REGARDLESS WHETHER THIS
PROJECT GOES FORWARD, THE CITY
INTENDS TO REPLACE ALL AIRPORT
RUNWAY AND TAXIWAY LIGHTING
WITH LIGHT FIXTURES.
PLUS WE HAVE THE SOLAR AT THE
AIRPORT WHICH IS GREAT.
THE SITE ITSELF IS REDUCING OUR
CARBON EMISSIONS.
OBVIOUSLY THE OPERATIONS AT THE
AIRPORT DO NOT REDUCE
CARBON EMISSIONS.
>> THIS AIRPORT PERFORMS
SERVICES.
IT DOES NOT JUST SERVE THE AND
I LIKE THIS PHRASE
CARBON SPEWING CHARIOTS OF THE
PRIVILEGED.
I SAY I USE IT BECAUSE I
THOUGHT THAT WAS FUNNY BUT IT
ISN'T ALL THAT THE AIRPORT DOES
.
THE AIRPORT HAS MULTIPLE FLIGHT
SCHOOLS AND IS ONE OF THE
BUSIEST PILOT TRAINING AIRPORTS
IN THE STATE.
PILOT TRAINING IS JOB TRAINING
.
THIS IS NOT FOR THE PRIVILEGED.
THERE HAS BEEN A PRIVATE PILOT
SHORTAGE BOTH NATIONALLY AND
GLOBALLY FOR MANY YEARS THAT IS
EXPECTED TO CONTINUE.
MORE INDIVIDUALS ARE LEARNING
TO FLY TODAY BECAUSE THE
SHORTAGE OPENS UP CAREER
OPPORTUNITIES AND ADVANCEMENT.
DOZENS OF PILOTS THAT LEARN TO
FLY IN ANN ARBOR ARE NOW FLYING
COMMERCIAL AND MILITARY
AIRCRAFT AROUND THE NATION AND
LONGER RUNWAY WILL MAKE THEIR
TRAINING SAFER.
ALSO THE CIVIL AIR PATROL, A
VOLUNTEER AUXILIARY SERVICE
OF THE U.S. AIR FORCE THAT
SUPPLIES OR THAT RESPONDS TO
NATURAL DISASTERS ALSO FLIES
OUT OF THE ANN ARBOR AIRPORT
AND FINALLY THE AIRPORT.
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT BETWEEN
THE AIRPORT ITSELF AND THE
POSITIONS THAT ARE SUPPORTED BY
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY THAT THE
AIRPORT GENERATES, THERE'S A
TOTAL OF FIVE HUNDRED AND
THIRTY EIGHT JOBS SUPPORTED BY
THE AIRPORT WHICH CONTRIBUTES
NEARLY WELL NINETY THREE POINT
SEVEN MILLION OF ECONOMIC
ACTIVITY ANNUALLY.
SO THE AIRPORT BENEFITS AND IN
MANY WAYS AND I DO APPRECIATE
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG'S NOTES
ABOUT WHAT IT DOES MEAN IN
TERMS OF EQUITY TO DIVERT TO
WILLOW RUN.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT AND I'M
VOTING YES BY THE WAY, COUNCIL
MEMBER ADAM.
>> SO DESPITE THE DECADES BUT
THIS HAS APPARENTLY BEEN A
TOPIC I HAD NO IDEA ABOUT ANY
KIND PLANS TO EXPAND THE
AIRPORT UNTIL I RAN FOR CITY
COUNCIL IN 2022 AND NOT IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT PROBABLY SOME
OF OUR SPEAKERS LIVE IN AND
HEARD ABOUT IT AND SO THEN HAD
TO QUICKLY GET UP TO SPEED THE
ALMOST COMPLETE LACK
OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT THAT I'VE
HEARD, YOU KNOW, MAKES IT
SOMEWHAT OF A MYSTERY WHY THIS
HAS BEEN KIND OF GOING ON FOR
SO LONG.
BUT I ALSO UNDERSTAND THAT
PREVIOUS COUNCILS HAVEN'T
DIRECTED STAFF TO CONDUCT THE
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
SO HERE WE ARE.
BUT I DO NOT PLAN TO SUPPORT
THIS PROJECT.
NUMBER ONE, I WILL NOTE IN THE
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT BUT IT
SAYS THE PURPOSE OF THE
PROPOSED ACTION IS TO IMPROVE
OPERATIONAL UTILITY OF THE
AIRPORT BY MEETING THE TAKE OFF
AND LANDING RUNWAY LENGTH
REQUIREMENTS OF AIRCRAFT THAT
CURRENTLY OPERATE THE AIRPORT
AND ARE PROJECTED TO GRADUALLY
INCREASE OPERATIONS OVER TIME.
TO ME THAT SOUNDS LIKE YOU KNOW
I KNOW THAT SAYS GRADUAL BUT IT
DOES SOUND LIKE WE'RE PLANNING
TO YOU KNOW, THROUGH THIS
ACTION EXPAND ACTIVITY THERE
AND I DON'T REALLY BELIEVE THAT
EVEN THOUGH THERE ARE BENEFITS
OF THE AIRPORT AND I RECOGNIZE
THOSE I DON'T BELIEVE THAT THE
STATED BENEFITS OF THE RUNWAY
EXPANSION OUTWEIGHS THE
NEGATIVE IMPACTS TO RESIDENTS
THAT WE HEARD ABOUT IN TERMS
OF NOISE.
THE AIRPORT DOES PRESENT
NEGATIVE EXTERNALITIES AND I
THINK WE HAVE TO PAY ATTENTION
TO THOSE IMPACTS ON PEOPLE THAT
LIVE IN THE AREA.
ALSO AS HAS BEEN NOTED MANY
TIMES ARE ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS
THAT EXIST LOCALLY.
THE REDUNDANCY ARGUMENT I THINK
IS AN IMPORTANT ONE.
WE HAVE AN AIRPORT THAT'S JUST
TWELVE MILES AWAY THAT IS BUILT
FOR THIS KIND OF TRAFFIC AND SO
I THINK SINCE OTHER REGIONAL
OPTIONS EXIST I DON'T REALLY
REGARD THE WHAT'S BEEN
CHARACTERIZED AS AN UNDUE
BURDEN.
I DO NOT REGARD.
>> SO I WILL NOT BE SUPPORTING
EITHER OF THESE RESOLUTIONS.
COUNCIL MEMBER BREEKS THINK SO
JUST TO EXPAND A LITTLE BIT ON
MY EARLIER PREPARED STATEMENTS
,YOU KNOW, I THINK I
UNDERSTAND THAT FOLKS HAVE
THOUGHT A OUT ABOUT THIS ISSUE
COMING INTO THE ROOM TONIGHT
ALREADY BUT I WOULD I WOULD
CHALLENGE JUST CONTINUE TO
CHALLENGE US TO THINK ABOUT IF
SOME BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE
NEGATIVE EXTERNALITIES, WHY DO
WE BELIEVE THAT IT IS OK FOR
ANOTHER COMMUNITY TO FACE THOSE
INSTEAD OF OURS BECAUSE WE KNOW
THAT THOSE IN WEST WILLOW ARE
LOWER INCOME.
IT IS A MAJORITY BLACK
COMMUNITY IF WE BELIEVE THAT
THOSE ARE NEGATIVE
EXTERNALITIES, I THINK WE'VE
DEMONSTRATED THERE ARE SIZABLE
BENEFITS TO OUR AIRPORT AS WELL
AND I THINK IT'S AN ASSET TO
OUR COMMUNITY.
WE HAVE HEARD OF ALL OF THE THE
GREAT SERVICES THAT PROVIDES TO
OUR COMMUNITY WHETHER THAT'S
ECONOMIC OR THE HEALTH CARE
SERVICES THAT IT PROVIDES.
IT'S A REAL GEM AND THE FACT
THAT IT'S NOT SUPPORTED BY
GENERAL FUND POLICIES IS A REAL
TESTAMENT TO OUR AIRPORT
MANAGEMENT MANAGER AND THE TEAM
OF A TEAM OF FOLKS THAT HAVE
BEEN DOING THIS.
BUT YES, YOU KNOW, FOLKS ARE
GOING TO SAY AND WE DO SAY WE
HAVE A SAFE AIRPORT, RIGHT?
TRUE.
WE DO.
BUT THAT ARGUMENT HASN'T ENOUGH
FOR US ON NORTH MAIN STREET OR
HURON.
WE RECOGNIZE THAT THERE ARE
BETTER STANDARDS AND IN FACT
WE'RE BEING TOLD THAT I'M NOT
AT THIS POINT THERE ARE BETTER
STANDARDS.
USUALLY WE'RE COMBATING THEM
RIGHT.
FAA IS TELLING US THAT THERE
ARE HIGHER STANDARDS THAT WE
COULD THAT WE COULD FOLLOW HERE
WE ARE HEARING FROM THE FOLKS
THAT DO TRAINING IN OUR
COMMUNITY THAT AND INSTRUCT AND
SAY THIS COULD BE A SAFER
FACILITY FOR OUR COMMUNITY AND
FOR THE FOLKS THAT ARE
OPERATING THERE AND IN FACT
SOMEBODY HAD TO BE, YOU KNOW, A
CRASH OCCURRED AND HAD TO THE
THE PLANE HAD TO BE PRIED.
PARTS OF THE PILOT COULD COULD
BE COULD BE FORTUNATELY SAFE
BUT YOU KNOW, THESE ARE NOT
THIS IS NOT THE STANDARD THAT I
THINK THAT WE CAN HOLD
OURSELVES TO.
I THINK WE CAN DO BETTER AND I
THINK WE SHOULD DO BETTER AND I
KNOW THERE ARE POLITICAL
REASONS BUT I THINK WE CAN DO
BETTER FURTHER DISCUSSION.
>> KEVIN MCCARTHY.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
YOU KNOW A COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS, I DO APPRECIATE YOU
BRINGING YOU KNOW, IF THERE IS
EXTERNAL NEGATIVE EXTERNALITIES
AND IS OK THEN TO DIVERT SOME
OF THE SOME OF THE PLANES THE
ACTIVITY TO WILL RUN WHICH IS A
COMMUNITY THAT HAS A LOT
OF INEQUITIES AND DISPARITIES.
I THINK ONE THING THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT IS THAT
YOU KNOW, NOT TO BRING IT BACK
TO BICENTENNIAL PARK BUT WE WE
DO HAVE THOSE INEQUITIES AND
DISPARITIES AROUND THE AIRPORT
AS WELL.
I LIVE REALLY CLOSE THAT TO THE
AIRPORT AND THEIR IT IS THE
MOST DIVERSE ECONOMICALLY,
RACIALLY SIDE OF OUR TOWN.
IT'S AN AREA THAT HAS NEEDED
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
I'M HOPING THAT WILL HAPPEN
WITH BICENTENNIAL PARK THAT
WILL ATTRACT MORE BUSINESSES.
BUT I ALSO THINK ABOUT YOU
KNOW, WITH IT BEING LIKE A FORM
IN IT I THINK DRIVE THE
INCREASED AIR TRAFFIC ACTIVITY
OVER THE PARK AS WELL.
I JUST WANT US TO ALSO
ACKNOWLEDGE THE FACT THAT
THERE'S DISPARITIES WITHIN OUR
COMMUNITY AS WELL AND THIS
ACTUALLY HAPPENS TO BE VERY
CLOSE TO IT IN CLOSE PROXIMITY
TO IT.
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
.
>> FOR MY PART I'D LIKE TO
OBSERVE AS COUNCIL MEMBER
OF DENHA HAS THAT THERE IS
ONGOING LITIGATION ASSOCIATED
WITH THE CONTEMPLATED PROJECT
AS A WHOLE AND SO I'M GOING TO
KEEP MY REMARKS A LITTLE BIT
GENERAL.
BUT I WOULD LIKE TO SAY EXPRESS
A GREAT DEAL OF GRATITUDE TO TO
THE STAFF MEMBERS AND COMMUNITY
MEMBERS WHO HAVE GOTTEN HERE
TODAY.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE STAFF
MEMBERS, COMMUNITY MEMBERS BOTH
WITHIN AND OUTSIDE THE AIRPORT
WHO CARE A GREAT DEAL ABOUT ITS
OPERATION AND UNDER CURRENT
CIRCUMSTANCE IS WORK EXTREMELY
HARD EVERY DAY TO TO HAVE IT BE
AN AIRPORT ABOUT WITH RESPECT
TO WHICH THE MUNICIPAL
ORGANIZATION IN THE COMMUNITY
AS A WHOLE CAN BE AND IS INDEED
PROUD AT THE SAME TIME AND AND
RECOGNIZING THAT AND CONTINUING
TO HONOR IT, I'M GOING TO BE
VOTING NO ON THE ON THE PROJECT
BOTH ON THIS THIS RESOLUTION
AND AND THE NEXT ONE BROADLY.
YOU KNOW, I GUESS I'D LIKE TO
JUST HIT QUITE BRIEFLY THAT IF
THE IF THE CURRENT CONDITION
OF THE AIRPORT DID NOT MEET FAA
SAFETY CRITERIA, THE FAA WOULD
NOT PERMIT ITS OPERATION.
THE FAA PERMITS OPERATIONS WITH
THE CURRENT RUNWAY
CONFIGURATION.
AND SO FROM THAT I CONCLUDE
THAT THAT CONFIGURATION DOES
NOT POSE AN IMMINENT SAFETY
HAZARD.
THERE ARE A BROAD RANGE OF OF
COMMUNITY HOPES AND DREAMS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE THE
AIRPORT'S CONTINUANCE AND THE
AIRPORT CESSATION.
BUT YOU KNOW, THAT'S THAT'S NOT
REALLY WHAT'S AT ISSUE HERE.
WHAT'S AT ISSUE HERE IS PRETTY
IT'S PRETTY TIGHT IS PRETTY
LOCALIZED AND THAT IS WHAT ARE
WE GOING TO DO WITH RESPECT TO
THIS GRANT?
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO WITH
RESPECT TO THE ENGINEERING
SERVICES CONTRACT?
FOR MY PART BECAUSE OF MY MY
CONFIDENCE IN STAFF'S ABILITY
TO OPERATE THE AIRPORT IN ITS
CURRENT CONDITION BECAUSE OF MY
CONCLUSION WITH RESPECT TO FAA
CRITERIA AND THE FAA IS
CONTINUING AND IT'S AN ONGOING
OPERATION AND FOR FOR OTHER
REASONS I'M GOING TO BE VOTING
NO IN BOTH CONTEXTS FURTHER
DISCUSSION ROLL CALL VOTE
PLEASE.
>> STARTING WITH COLUMBIA
MEMBER CORNELL COUNCIL MEMBER
MARNELL
BECAUSE OF OUR DESH.
YES SIR.
HARRISON NO COUNCILOR WATSON NO
.
COUNCILOR MALIK YES.
COUNCILOR DENHA NO CUSTOMER
OUTSIDE ONE NO TAYLOR NO
CUSTOMER ER NO CUSTOMER NO
ELSEWHERE BRIGS YES WARRENVILLE
DSU RESOLUTION TO APPROVE THE
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY ENGINEERS INC
FOR ENGINEERING SERVICES FOR
THE SAFETY EXTENSION OF RUNWAY
SIX TO FOUR AT THE ANN ARBOR
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
THE AMOUNT OF SIX HUNDRED
EIGHTEEN THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED
DOLLARS APPROVED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH DISCUSSION
PIECE OF DATA COUNCILOR BRIGGS
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO SAY THANK
YOU TO I'M SURE I DON'T SEEM MR
KARNAC WHO IS RETIRING FROM THE
CITY AND FEBRUARY AND THIS HAS
BEEN THIS PROJECT THAT'S A BIG
PART OF HIS CAREER AND SO I
KNOW HE AND CITY STAFF HAVE
WORKED A LOT ON THIS BUT I JUST
WANTED TO THANK HIM.
I KNOW HE'S HAD TO ANSWER A LOT
OF QUESTIONS AND PRODUCE A LOT
OF MATERIALS FOR US SO THAT WE
COULD MAKE AN EDUCATED DECISION
ON THIS AND SO MANY THANKS TO
HIM AND THANKS FOR HIS SERVICE
OVER HIS TIME WITH THE CITY
FURTHER DISCUSSION
WHAT SHE
SAID
STAFFS WORK IS HARD.
YOU KNOW THEY COME TO US WITH
THEIR PROFESSIONAL OPINION.
>> THEY COME TO US WORKING ON
THE DAILY.
THEY IMPLEMENT WHAT YOU KNOW,
COUNCIL COUNCIL'S POLICY
DIRECTIVES AND THEN THEY
PROVIDE THE BEST ADVICE THAT
THEY CAN TO COUNCILORS AS
COUNCILOR CONTINUES TO EVALUATE
AND REEVALUATE THOSE DIRECTIVES
.
IT'S IT'S A GREAT NOBLE NOBLE
TASK.
>> SO THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION
.
>> ROLL CALL VOTE.
PLEASE START WITH COUNCILOR
MCCRINDLE CUSTOMER COL NO
CUSTOMER DISH.
YES.
CUSTOMER HARRISON NO COUNCILOR
WATSON NO.
>> COUNCILOR MALIK YES.
COUNCILOR DENHA NO COUNCILOR
GARCIA NO MAYOR TAYLOR NO
CUSTOMER ER NO CUSTOMER NO
CUSTOMER BREAKS.
>> YES WELL SCHAFFEL'S MISS WE
HAVE A CLOSED SESSION TODAY IF
MAYOR TAYLOR THERE'S A REQUEST
FOR A CLOSED SESSION UNDER FCL
FIFTEEN POINT TWO SIX EIGHT
SECTION EIGHT ONE DENHA TO
CONSIDER THE PURCHASE OF OR
LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY.
THAT IS ONE REASON FOR A CLOSED
SESSION A SECOND IS TO HAVE A
CLOSED SESSION UNDER SECTION
EIGHT ONE H REGARDING A
PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL
MEMO PROVIDED TO COUNCIL ON
NOVEMBER 11, 2024 MAY FOR MUCH
NOVEMBER SEVEN, 2012 THANK YOU
NEVER MOST TO BE SECOND TO
CLOSED SESSION ON THIS BASIS
MOVE BY COUNCIL MCCONNELL
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER THE
DENHA DISCUSSION ROLL-CALL VOTE
PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL
MEMBER CORNHILL COUNCILOR
PARNELL.
YES THANKS FOR DISH.
YES BECAUSE WE'RE HARRISON YES.
COUNCILOR WATSON.
YES SIR.
MALIK YES.
DENHA YES.
YES MAYOR TAYLOR YES.
WE'RE ER YES SIR.
YES SIR.
BRIGGS YES.
MOTION CARRY WE ARE IN CLOSED
SESSION
CONCESSION
PROOF DO WE
HAVE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
OUR CITY ATTORNEY?
>> NO.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW, WE HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE WITH
MY COUNTERPART BY COUNCILMAN
HARRISON DISCUSSION ON FAVOR
POSED.
WE'RE ADJOURNED.